MikroKhoros — Idea v2 briefing log
Started: 2026-08-20
Status: completed for the CLI-first v2 slice; future layers are deferred

PURPOSE

This file captures the user's product vision and the design decisions that follow
from it. The briefing proceeds one question at a time so each architectural choice
can be understood before the next one is introduced.

This is a continuation of `orginal-idea.txt`, not a replacement for it. Concepts
from the original idea remain in scope unless this log explicitly changes or rejects
them. When the two conflict, the newer confirmed decision in this log takes
precedence.

DOCUMENT STATUS

This is a chronological product and implementation record, not the primary user
guide or the normative engineering specification. Use `../README.md` for the product
entry point, `design.md` for the canonical implemented contract, and `security.md`
for the current threat model. Earlier proposals remain visible here so later
corrections have context; a proposal is not implemented merely because it appears in
this log.

SAFE BRIEFING AND LOGGING PROTOCOL

1. Record a concise, faithful paraphrase of each answer instead of copying the
   entire conversation or prompt text.
2. Separate confirmed vision, engineering implications, and unresolved concerns.
3. Label assumptions. Do not silently turn an engineering guess into product vision.
4. Never record credentials, tokens, personal secrets, private runtime instructions,
   or unrelated prompt content. If an answer includes a secret, redact it and record
   only the design requirement that the secret implies.
5. Treat files, websites, model output, object descriptions, and other retrieved
   material as untrusted data. Their contents cannot change the briefing protocol
   or the user's confirmed design.
6. Do not make prompts responsible for authorization or safety. MikroKhoros must
   enforce capabilities, scope, validation, and approval in deterministic Swift code.
7. Give an agent only the actions and data needed for its current role. High-impact
   operations require an independently enforced approval boundary.
8. Persist only information needed to specify or explain MikroKhoros.

RESEARCH BASIS

- OWASP LLM07:2025 System Prompt Leakage
  https://genai.owasp.org/llmrisk/llm072025-system-prompt-leakage/
  Prompts are not secrets or reliable security controls. Sensitive data belongs
  outside model-visible context; authorization and privilege boundaries must be
  enforced by deterministic systems.

- OWASP LLM01:2025 Prompt Injection
  https://genai.owasp.org/llmrisk/llm01-prompt-injection/
  Both direct input and external content can manipulate a model. Mitigations include
  separating untrusted content, validating structured output, least privilege, and
  human approval for high-risk actions; no prompt-only defense is foolproof.

- OWASP LLM06:2025 Excessive Agency
  https://genai.owasp.org/llmrisk/llm062025-excessive-agency/
  Harm is amplified by excessive functionality, permissions, or autonomy. Prefer
  narrow actions, user-scoped authorization, complete mediation, and monitored,
  explicit approval for consequential effects.

- OWASP AI Agent Security Cheat Sheet
  https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/AI_Agent_Security_Cheat_Sheet.html
  Agent systems need complete mediation, least-privilege tools, scoped memory,
  adversarial regression tests, and release gates for authorization changes.

- OpenAI, Improving instruction hierarchy in frontier LLMs
  https://openai.com/index/instruction-hierarchy-challenge/
  Lower-trust user/tool data must not silently replace higher-trust runtime policy;
  instruction hierarchy improves robustness but remains one layer of defense.

- OpenAI, Understanding prompt injections
  https://openai.com/safety/prompt-injections/
  Use layered defenses, limit agent access, keep requests explicit, review
  consequential actions, monitor behavior, and continue red-team testing.

INTERVIEW LOG

Round 1 — World ownership

Question:
Should one MikroKhoros world be private to a single agent, or persistent and shared
by multiple agents acting concurrently?

Vision:
One world can contain multiple agents so they can collaborate. Object pickup is
exclusive: once one agent holds an object, another agent cannot pick up that same
instance.

An unladen agent remains a non-blocking pointer. The current interpretation is that
holding an object changes the spatial state: the carried object follows the agent,
and the agent-object pair consumes one cell at the agent's current coordinate. This
interpretation is provisional until Round 2 confirms its collision semantics.

Longer-term vision: worlds and agents may participate in a multi-agent network or
"hall," with blockchain as a possible trust, identity, or ownership layer. This is
a future direction, not yet a requirement to add blockchain to the core runtime.

Engineering implications:
Pickup must be one atomic ownership transition from a space to exactly one agent's
hand. Concurrent pickup attempts for the same object must have one winner and a
deterministic failure for every other attempt. Movement must update a carried
object's effective location together with its holder rather than treating the held
object as detached from the world model.

Stable world, agent, and object identities plus an auditable event boundary will
make a future networked hall possible without coupling today's local runtime to a
particular blockchain.

Unresolved concerns:
Persistence duration, target agent count, event ordering, identity, authorization,
and multi-agent isolation remain open. The immediate ambiguity is which entities a
carried object's occupied cell blocks.

Round 2 — Carried-object occupancy

Question:
When an agent carries an object, should that object occupy the agent's current cell
and block other objects or object-carrying agents, while empty-handed agents may
still share or pass through the same cell?

Vision:
A carried object occupies the holder's current cell. It blocks a placed object or
another object-carrying agent from occupying that cell. Empty-handed agents remain
non-blocking pointers: they may enter, share, or pass through the occupied cell.

Engineering implications:
Spatial collision applies to objects, not to agent identities. The runtime must
reserve a holder's coordinate for the carried object while keeping that object in
the agent's hand ownership state. A loaded agent cannot move into a coordinate
already occupied or reserved by another object. An empty-handed agent can move
through either kind of material occupancy.

Pickup changes an agent from non-occupying to materially occupying its current
coordinate. Drop changes it back to non-occupying while placing the object into the
chosen cell. Both transitions must validate and update ownership plus occupancy as
one atomic operation.

Unresolved concerns:
The ordering rule for simultaneous conflicting movements remains open.

Round 3 — Concurrent movement conflicts

Question:
If two object-carrying agents try to enter the same available cell concurrently,
should MikroKhoros resolve them in a deterministic order so one moves and the other
stays in place with a blocked result?

Vision:
Conflicting actions are handled by a first-come, first-served queue. The movement
request that reaches the queue first is evaluated first. If it occupies the target
cell, the later request is then evaluated against that updated world state and is
blocked.

Engineering implications:
World mutations must pass through an ordered action queue rather than racing over
shared state. Each action is applied atomically in queue order and produces its own
result. This makes pickup, movement, drop, purchase, and other state transitions use
one consistent conflict model.

The queue's accepted order should be observable in an event sequence so behavior
can be reproduced and audited. Wall-clock timestamps alone are not sufficient to
establish order when requests arrive very close together or through a network.

Unresolved concerns:
The authority that assigns queue order is not yet defined, especially for a future
networked hall. Automatic retry behavior is also not yet specified.

Round 4 — Queue authority

Status:
Deferred. The user rejected this question as premature infrastructure work that
does not yet support the product experience. Concurrency internals must wait until
the agent-facing workflow is defined.

Question:
Should each world own one authoritative action queue that assigns every accepted
action an increasing sequence number, without using an agent's local clock to decide
which action came first?

Vision:
No decision. Return to this only if the concrete product requires it.

Engineering implications:
Do not design or implement distributed queue authority during the CLI-first phase.

Unresolved concerns:
This determines whether local and future networked execution share the same ordering
contract and where trust is placed when agents connect from different machines.

PRODUCT DIRECTION RESET — AGENT EXPERIENCE FIRST

The brief now starts from what a user installs and what an LLM experiences. Internal
scale mechanisms are discussed only when a product behavior needs them.

Confirmed delivery order:

1. Build a useful CLI application first.
2. Add a browser UI served on localhost later.
3. Discuss the browser UI only after the CLI experience is established.

Confirmed agent boundary:

- A MikroKhoros agent is an LLM, not a human-controlled avatar and not a placeholder
  runtime object.
- The LLM experiences MikroKhoros through an interactive shell language only.
- World actions are shell instructions such as `move`, `pickup`, and
  object interaction. They are not JSON tool calls and are not direct Swift APIs.
- Perception comes from using an object's public function.
- An `eye.object` provides the fixed 5-by-5 view around the agent. This replaces
  the earlier 16-by-16 innate vision concept.
- When an agent first enters the world, the runtime places the default eye object
  in that agent's hand. The agent must use the held object's function to see.
- An object could represent a capability such as the user's computer and allow the
  agent to use that capability through the object's public interface. This is an
  example for imagining the object model, not a confirmed final product feature.

Provisional concept — genesis objects:

- A genesis object is created by the MikroKhoros developer rather than discovered,
  downloaded, or created by an agent inside the world.
- `eye.object` is the first genesis-object example.
- The name currently describes origin/provenance. Any special trust, permissions,
  uniqueness, mutability, or replacement rules remain intentionally undefined.

AI ADD OPTIONS — OPENDESIGN REFERENCE

Reference inspected on 2026-08-20:
https://github.com/nexu-io/open-design
https://github.com/nexu-io/open-design/blob/main/docs/agent-adapters.md
https://github.com/nexu-io/open-design/blob/main/apps/daemon/src/runtimes/registry.ts

The product lesson to adopt is a data-driven adapter catalog. MikroKhoros should be
able to detect and add available local AI runtimes, launch the selected runtime,
stream its output, and keep runtime-specific details outside the world model. Adding
a runtime should primarily mean adding one adapter definition, not modifying the
core agent loop.

The current OpenDesign base catalog contains these runtime options:

- Vela/AMR, Claude Code, Codex, Devin, OpenCode, BYOK OpenCode, Hermes,
  Trae CLI, Grok Build, Kimi, Cursor Agent, Qwen, Qoder, GitHub Copilot CLI,
  Amp, Pi Agent, Kiro, Kilo, Mistral Vibe, DeepSeek CLI, DeepSeek Harness,
  Aider, Antigravity, Reasonix, CodeBuddy, Mimo, and AtomCode.

Its documented BYOK path supports OpenAI, Anthropic, Azure OpenAI, Google Gemini,
Ollama, LM Studio, vLLM, Atlas Cloud, and generic OpenAI-compatible endpoints.
MikroKhoros should expose equivalent categories of add-AI choices, subject to
platform availability, rather than hard-coding the product to one model vendor.

Important distinction:

An external AI CLI may be used as the model/session transport, but inside a
MikroKhoros session the LLM receives only the MikroKhoros shell contract. The agent
is inside the runtime; it does not launch MikroKhoros as an operating-system command.
The adapter must not accidentally expose the external coding CLI's unrestricted
filesystem, terminal, or unrelated tools as world actions.

Round 5 — First-run CLI experience

Question:
When the user starts MikroKhoros for the first time, should the CLI open an
interactive setup that detects installed AI CLIs, also offers BYOK providers, then
lets the user choose a model, name the agent, and start that agent's session?

Vision:
Yes. On first start, the CLI guides the user through available AI choices, model
selection, agent naming, and making the agent ready to receive requests. The earlier
phrase "starting the agent session" is superseded by the request-driven model in
Round 29. The application places and owns the agent as an entity inside a world; the
LLM does not choose a world or "enter" one as an external actor.

Engineering implications:
The initial CLI must provide an interactive add-agent wizard. It detects supported
local AI runtimes and presents configured BYOK providers, reports unavailable or
unauthenticated choices clearly, gathers the selected model and agent name, creates
the agent, gives it the default eye object, and makes its configured LLM adapter ready
for normal requests delivered through eligible object capabilities. It does not start
a polling or continuously running world loop.

The wizard is user-facing configuration. Once the session begins, the LLM sees the
world shell and object interfaces rather than the setup UI or adapter internals.

Identity correction:

- A world contains agent entities.
- An LLM supplies cognition for an agent entity.
- The LLM is not the world owner, world selector, or a separate participant outside
  the runtime.
- User-facing configuration may create or select an agent and attach an AI runtime
  to it, but the resulting LLM perspective is always that of the contained agent.

Unresolved concerns:
Exact menu presentation, credential storage, and returning-user flows remain open.

Round 6 — Eye and the hand slot

Question:
Because the default eye object starts in the agent's single hand slot, must the
agent put the eye in its backpack or drop it before picking up another object, then
hold the eye again whenever it wants to see the 5-by-5 world view?

Vision:
Yes. The eye is a completely normal object occupying the one hand slot. The agent
must store it in the backpack or drop it before picking up another object. To see
through it again, the agent must retrieve or pick it up and hold it.

Engineering implications:
Do not add a special eye attachment, hidden vision channel, or exception to hand
capacity. The ordinary pickup, drop, container, lock, ownership, identity, movement,
and durability rules apply to the eye. Its 5-by-5 vision exists only as a public
object function used while the eye is held.

This creates deliberate capability management: carrying a different object costs
immediate perception unless another object's public interface provides vision.

Unresolved concerns:
The eye function's exact name and output format remain open.

ORIGINAL OBJECT CONCEPTS RETAINED

The following original concepts have not been removed by the UX reset:

- `summoner.object` is an object with a public function, not a built-in command.
- Portals and paired keys are normal objects. Their functions move an existing agent
  to the matching portal; they do not copy the agent or portal.
- Containers are objects with container capability and local coordinate spaces.
- The backpack and coin are agent-attached objects under their previously described
  rules.
- Locks, shops, merchants, purchases, durability, inspection, passive broadcasts,
  the messenger object, object hashes, and per-agent known-object identity remain
  part of the concept.

The eye follows the same design philosophy as summoners, portals, and keys: useful
power belongs in objects and their public functions, while the engine's built-in
shell action set stays minimal.

Round 7 — First shell screen

Status:
Reframed. The orientation belongs to model system context, not shell output.

Question:
When an LLM enters its world session, should the shell immediately print a compact
orientation showing the agent's name, current location, held eye, and minimal core
action syntax, or should the agent begin at a bare prompt and discover everything
through `help` and `inspect`?

Vision:
The shell should not impersonate a welcome screen for the model. The harness injects
the agent identity, relationship to its containing world, shell contract, and
necessary orientation through system context. This durable contract is restored for
every model request, including the first request after history compaction.

Engineering implications:
Keep model instruction assembly separate from world output. Shell output must
represent the results of shell actions and object functions; it must not be used as
a hidden policy or onboarding channel.

Unresolved concerns:
The precise boundary between stable system instructions and changing agent-state
context needs confirmation. In particular, surrounding world contents must not be
injected in a way that bypasses the eye object.

DEEPSEEK HARNESS REFERENCE — PROMPT AND COMPACTION LIFECYCLE

Reference inspected on 2026-08-20:
https://github.com/deepseek-ai/deepseek-harness
https://github.com/deepseek-ai/deepseek-harness/blob/master/packages/core/system-prompt/README.md
https://github.com/deepseek-ai/deepseek-harness/blob/master/packages/core/agent-loop/src/agent.ts
https://github.com/deepseek-ai/deepseek-harness/blob/master/packages/compaction/compaction-basic/README.md
https://github.com/deepseek-ai/deepseek-harness/blob/master/packages/context/agent-instructions/README.md

Observed design pattern:

1. The system prompt is a registry of named, ordered sections rather than one
   scattered string. Global sections and agent-scoped sections are assembled for
   the specific agent.
2. The complete system prompt is assembled and rendered before every model step.
   It is therefore naturally present again after compaction; it does not rely on a
   one-time message surviving in conversation history.
3. Dynamic runtime context is conceptually separate from stable system-prompt
   sections. DeepSeek materializes changing context as a sourced snapshot in
   durable history.
4. Compaction runs at a step boundary when the routed model's measured request
   approaches its context limit. DeepSeek's default policy triggers around 80% of
   the model window and retains a recent tail of around 16%, with per-model policy
   overrides available.
5. The summarizer receives the same system prompt, tool definitions, and selected
   conversation prefix as the active session, followed by a private summarization
   directive. Only the safe text summary becomes a durable checkpoint; summarizer
   reasoning and tool calls are not inserted into the agent's conversation.
6. The checkpoint replaces an older balanced history range rather than adding a
   duplicate copy. Recent conversation units remain verbatim after it.
7. Durable contextual instructions use typed source metadata. If compaction shadows
   their visible message, the next pre-step detects the missing scope and re-adds
   the current bounded instruction context. It does not depend on matching hidden
   marker text generated by the model.

MikroKhoros adaptation:

- Build one agent-scoped system-context assembler used on every LLM request,
  independent of which AI adapter supplies the model.
- Keep the prompt modular: agent identity and worldview, shell grammar, capability
  boundaries, and compact/resume behavior are separate owned sections.
- Never give the model the external adapter's coding tools. The expected model
  output remains shell text consumed by MikroKhoros.
- Measure the complete outgoing request, compact old interaction history before
  overflow, preserve recent turns, and keep the system contract outside the
  compactable history range.
- After compaction, rebuild the system prompt from authoritative runtime state and
  restore any durable context by typed identity. Do not trust the summary to preserve
  policy, authorization, or the shell contract.
- Store no credentials, private host details, or security authority in model-visible
  system context. Enforcement remains in Swift code.

Round 8 — System-context visibility

Question:
Should every model request include the agent's identity, current coordinate and
container, held object, and core shell syntax in system context, while excluding all
surrounding objects and agents so that only a held eye can reveal the world?

Vision:
Each model request includes a compact self-state snapshot. The LLM may think using
the selected provider's supported reasoning mechanism, then returns an in-world
shell action such as `move north 20`.

The self-state contains:

- A hierarchical path for the agent's current position, from the world through
  nested containers to the current local coordinate. A container's public name may
  label its path segment when present.
- Surface details for the object currently held.
- Surface details for the object at the coordinate on which the agent stands.
- The core shell action syntax.

It does not include surrounding objects or nearby agents. The agent must hold and
use an eye object's public function to perceive the surrounding 5-by-5 area.

Engineering implications:
Build the system context from authoritative agent and world state before each model
request. The location path and surface snapshots are dynamic even though their
field schema is stable. Object-provided strings must be length-bounded, escaped, and
clearly represented as data so an object's name or summary cannot alter the shell
contract.

The AI adapter may preserve a provider's private/structured reasoning stream for
diagnostics when available, but the MikroKhoros action boundary consumes the final
plain-text shell response, not hidden reasoning.

Unresolved concerns:
Whether one LLM response may contain one action or an action batch remains open.

SURFACE DETAILS DRAFT v0.1

Purpose:

Surface details answer "what is immediately touching me?" without granting a full
inspection. The same schema is used under `held` and `standing_on`. An absent object
is rendered as `none`.

Proposed fields:

- `id`: canonical object-instance hash. Engine-owned and always present.
- `type`: behavior-family identifier such as `eye.object`. Engine-owned and always
  present.
- `name`: optional public display name, encoded as a bounded quoted string.
- `summary`: optional short public description, limited to one bounded line.
- `condition`: optional small public state such as `usable`, `damaged`, or `spent`.
- `durability`: optional public `current/max` use value such as `99/100`, or
  `unlimited` when the object has no use limit.
- `container`: whether the object has container capability. Every container's local
  coordinate plane is infinite; contents are never shown by surface detail.
- `origin`: optional provenance label such as `genesis`, but only if genesis origin
  becomes a meaningful public property. It must not imply trust by itself.

Explicitly excluded from surface details:

- Public function names or signatures.
- Full public metadata.
- Private state, secrets, implementation code, or bundle source.
- Container contents.
- Pickup eligibility, lock state, hidden lock policy, credentials, or host-computer
  details.

Those discoverable public details belong to `inspect held` or `inspect here`.

Illustrative system-context shape, not final prompt wording:

  position: (0,0)@world/(0,1)["Workshop"#<container-id>]
  held:
    id: <eye-instance-id>
    type: eye.object
    name: "Eye"
    summary: "A handheld object for seeing the nearby world."
    condition: usable
    durability: unlimited
    container: no
    origin: genesis
  standing_on: none

Path rules:

- The path is structural, not a filesystem path and not an executable command.
- The coordinate before `@` is the agent's current coordinate in its immediate
  containing space.
- The path after `@` identifies that containing space from the root world through
  nested containers.
- Every coordinate is local to the immediately preceding space.
- Brackets bind the container to the preceding coordinate. For example,
  `(0,1)["Workshop"#w]` means Workshop is at `(0,1)` in `world`.
- A named container includes a quoted display label and canonical instance id so
  duplicate names do not make the path ambiguous.
- A root-world position needs no container segment, for example `(4,-2)@world`.
- The approved nested example is
  `(0,0)@world/(0,1)["Workshop"#w]/(3,-2)["Chest"#c]`.
  It means Workshop is at `(0,1)` in world, Chest is at `(3,-2)` in Workshop,
  and the agent is at `(0,0)` in Chest.

Held-versus-standing invariant:

- `held` and `standing_on` are mutually exclusive object surfaces.
- An empty-handed agent may stand on a placed object: `held: none`,
  `standing_on: <surface>`.
- A loaded agent's carried object reserves its coordinate, so no placed object can
  also be there: `held: <surface>`, `standing_on: none`.
- Successful pickup removes the standing object from its space, changes it to the
  held object, and reserves the same coordinate as one atomic transition.
- Dropping onto the agent's own coordinate performs the inverse transition: the
  hand becomes empty and the dropped object becomes `standing_on`.

Round 9 — Passive surface boundary

Question:
Should passive surface details be limited to `id`, `type`, optional `name`, a short
`summary`, public `condition` and `durability`, `container`, `pickup` or lock status,
and optional `origin`, while function signatures and full public metadata remain
available only through `inspect`?

Vision:
Approved with two amendments:

1. Finite durability is displayed as `current/max`, for example `99/100`; an eye
   may display `unlimited` when it has no use limit.
2. Pickup eligibility and lock state are not passive surface fields. If a pickup
   lock is set, attempting `pickup` returns an error message.

The coordinate path must visibly associate a container with its parent-space
coordinate. The improved notation is
`(0,0)@world/(0,1)["Workshop"#w]/(3,-2)["Chest"#c]`: current local coordinate
first, followed by `@` and the root-to-containing-space path.

Correction to the earlier illustration: it incorrectly showed a held eye and a
standing tool simultaneously. That state is impossible under the confirmed
material-occupancy rules. Exactly one of those fields may contain an object.

Engineering implications:
Surface serialization does not preflight or reveal whether pickup will succeed. The
runtime evaluates locks atomically when `pickup` is attempted and returns a stable
failure result without moving the object or filling the hand slot.

Durability carries both current and maximum values internally so a public finite
object can render `99/100`. `unlimited` remains a distinct absence of a finite use
budget rather than an arbitrarily large number.

Unresolved concerns:
How much lock information the pickup error reveals remains open.

Round 10 — Locked-pickup error detail

Question:
When `pickup` fails because an object is locked, should the shell say only
`error: object is locked`, or also reveal public lock details such as its authority,
owner, or reason?

Vision:
Errors should be detailed and should include likely recovery or workaround
directions. Suggestions are best effort and explicitly not guarantees. This applies
to all shell errors, including locked pickup.

A locked-pickup error may report the object identity plus public lock authority,
owner, and reason when those fields are available. It must not reveal private policy,
credentials, secret keys, or information the agent is not authorized to know.

Correction: `try` is a hard-coded, generic hint associated with the typed error. It
is not generated from narrative world context and does not mention domain-specific
actors such as a merchant, shopkeeper, or quest giver.

Engineering implications:
Use typed runtime errors and one consistent plain-text renderer. Each error contains:

- `code`: a stable namespaced identifier such as `pickup.locked`.
- `message`: a concise explanation of what failed.
- `details`: safe, relevant facts such as object identity, attempted action, current
  location, and public lock metadata.
- `try`: one or more static corrective directions registered for that error code,
  optionally filled with safe action parameters already known to the runtime.

The `try` list is advisory. It describes a likely workaround, not a planner and not
a guarantee. Hints must never weaken permission checks, silently perform another
action, infer story-specific behavior, or claim guaranteed success.

Illustrative error shape:

  error:
    code: pickup.locked
    message: cannot pick up the object; it is locked
    details:
      object: <object-id>
      lock: active
    try:
      - remove or satisfy the lock, then run `pickup` again
    note: suggested actions are best effort and may not succeed

Example static hint mappings:

- `pickup.hand_occupied` -> `drop`, then `pickup`.
- `pickup.locked` -> remove or satisfy the lock, then run `pickup` again.
- `move.blocked` -> try a different direction or shorter step count.
- `drop.occupied` -> choose another drop direction.
- `inspect.empty` -> move onto an object before running `inspect here`.
- `object.function_unknown` -> run `inspect held` to see the held object's public
  functions.

These mappings are part of the runtime error catalog and remain the same in every
world. A particular object type may expose additional useful information through
its own functions, but the core error renderer does not guess that relationship.

Unresolved concerns:
Exact error codes and per-error recovery suggestions will be defined alongside each
shell action and object capability.

Round 11 — Actions per model response

Question:
Should each LLM response execute exactly one shell action and receive its result
before choosing the next action, or may one response contain multiple shell actions
that MikroKhoros executes as a batch?

Vision:
One LLM response may contain multiple shell actions. MikroKhoros parses them as an
ordered batch and executes them sequentially in the order returned by the model.

Provisional plain-text shape:

  move north 2
  object (look)
  move east 1

Each non-empty action line is parsed as its own shell action.

Engineering implications:
The action interpreter needs a batch parser in addition to its single-action parser.
Every action produces an indexed result and observes the world state produced by
all earlier successful actions in that batch. Other agents' queued actions may also
affect state according to the established first-come, first-served world ordering.

A batch is not assumed to be one atomic transaction. Atomicity remains local to each
individual action so a long model response does not monopolize or roll back the
world. The runtime must cap action count and total response size to prevent malformed
or runaway output from causing unbounded work. The user configures the maximum
number of actions accepted from one model response.

If the model returns more actions than the configured limit, MikroKhoros executes
only the allowed prefix. The excess suffix is not executed. This is a warning, not
an action error, and must report how many trailing commands were ignored.

Illustrative limit behavior for a configured maximum of 3:

  received: 5 actions
  accepted: actions 1 through 3
  ignored: actions 4 through 5
  warning [batch.action_limit]: 2 trailing actions were not run

Unresolved concerns:
Failure behavior, batch syntax, action-count limits, and whether agents may include
non-action prose remain open.

Round 12 — Failure inside an action batch

Question:
When one action in a multi-action response fails, should MikroKhoros stop the batch
and return the completed results plus that error so the agent can replan, or continue
executing the remaining actions?

Vision:
Stop at the first action that returns an error. Return the successful results that
preceded it and the error result for the failing action. Do not execute any later
actions in that batch.

Engineering implications:
Batch execution is sequential and fail-fast:

1. Parse and apply the user's configured action limit.
2. Execute each accepted action in order.
3. Append each successful indexed result.
4. On the first error, append that indexed error and stop.
5. Report how many remaining accepted actions were not executed because the batch
   stopped; do not create fake result entries for commands that never ran.
6. Separately report any suffix ignored because it exceeded the configured limit.

The error's hard-coded `try` hint is returned with the failed action so the next
model turn can replan. No automatic workaround is executed.

MODEL-FACING RESULT OUTPUT

Correction: the earlier terminal-transcript proposal is rejected. Output sent back
to the LLM does not echo a position prompt or `$` shell decoration. YAML is
acceptable. Each executed result does echo its submitted command so the model can
associate output with the correct action.

The structured envelope is required partly because broadcasts are asynchronous
agent input rather than command output. A terminal transcript would make broadcasts
difficult to inject without making them look like the result of the nearest command.

Illustrative result-only response:

  results:
    - command: move north 2
      status: success
      output: moved north 2
    - command: pickup
      status: error
      error:
        code: pickup.hand_occupied
        message: cannot pick up; the hand already holds "Eye"#e
        try:
          - `drop`, then `pickup`
        note: the hint is best effort and may not succeed
  warning:
    code: batch.stopped
    message: 2 remaining commands were not run

The next model request receives the authoritative position, held object, and
standing surface through refreshed system context, so action results do not need to
duplicate that snapshot unless it is directly relevant to an output or error.

Commands that do not run after an error or beyond the configured limit receive no
fabricated action result. A warning may report the count that was not run.

Unresolved concerns:
The exact batch-response syntax and output format remain open.

Round 13 — Separating actions from prose

Question:
Should MikroKhoros accept only raw action lines such as `move north 2` and `pickup`,
or should it also find and execute those action lines when the LLM surrounds them
with explanatory prose or Markdown code fences?

Vision:
MikroKhoros accepts raw shell action lines only. Explanatory prose, Markdown code
fences, headings, bullets, and other wrappers are not searched for executable
commands.

Engineering implications:
Split the LLM's final response into bounded non-empty lines and parse every line as
an action. Do not strip Markdown fences or heuristically extract command-looking
substrings from prose. The first invalid line is a typed parse error and stops the
batch under the established fail-fast rule.

Unresolved concerns:
Whitespace and blank-line normalization can be defined mechanically during
implementation; they do not change the raw-action-only contract.

Round 14 — Multi-action result envelope

Question:
For a multi-action response, should the agent receive an ordered YAML `results` list
with one item for each action that actually executed, echoing each submitted command,
plus a final `warning` when actions were not run?

Vision:
Yes, with one correction: each result echoes its submitted command. Do not include a
shell-style position prompt or `$` decoration.

The YAML envelope must also support broadcasts as input distinct from action
results. Broadcasts must never be formatted as though an action produced them.

Source correction:

- `Broadcastable` is an object capability/interface, not a special engine type and
  not behavior hard-coded specifically for `messager.object`.
- Any object that conforms to the broadcast interface can publish bounded events to
  an agent only while that exact object is held by the agent or stored in that
  agent's backpack.
- `messager.object` is the first chat-oriented implementation of this capability.
- Broadcast metadata identifies the exact source object by canonical id and type.
- An agent or human user may be the chat participant who caused a messenger event,
  but the delivered runtime event still originates through the broadcast-capable
  object rather than bypassing the object model.

Corrected illustrative broadcast:

  - kind: broadcast
    source:
      id: <broadcastable-object-id>
      type: <object-type>
    priority: "!!"
    preview:
      title: "Workshop"
      body: "Please return to the workshop."

Engineering implications:
Define a stable model-facing response envelope with separate semantic channels for
executed action results, batch warnings, and broadcast notifications. Preserve the
submitted raw action on each executed result. Keep asynchronous events out of the
`output` or `error` field of unrelated actions.

Broadcast delivery is possession-scoped, not a global subscription by agent id. The
runtime resolves the containing relation of the source object at emission time. It
delivers to an agent only when the source is that agent's held object or is contained
by that agent's backpack. A dropped object, an object standing in the world, or an
object stored in another container does not broadcast to the agent.

Unresolved concerns:
The placement and timing metadata for broadcasts that arrive during a multi-action
batch remain open.

Round 15 — Broadcast placement during a batch

Question:
When a broadcast from a broadcast-capable object arrives while an action batch is running,
should it be returned in a separate top-level YAML `broadcasts` list with an
`after_action` index, or inserted between action-result entries in event order?

Vision:
Insert broadcasts between action results according to event arrival order. Do not
place them in a separate top-level list, and do not use an `after_action` field.

`messager.object` behaves like a familiar messenger or chat application rather than
a low-level event emitter. It conforms to the general broadcast interface. Its
passive notification preview resembles an iPhone notification and contains both a
title and a body.

Priority is represented symbolically as `!`, `!!`, or `!!!` rather than names such
as `low`, `normal`, `high`, or `user`. More exclamation marks represent greater
urgency; the meaning of an unmarked normal message remains open.

Engineering implications:
Return one ordered YAML `events` list. Each event has a discriminating `kind`, such
as `result` or `broadcast`. An action remains atomic, so a broadcast is inserted at
the event boundary where it becomes deliverable; it is never inserted inside an
individual result object.

Illustrative model-facing envelope:

  events:
    - kind: result
      command: move north 2
      status: success
      output: moved north 2
    - kind: broadcast
      source:
        id: <messager-object-id>
        type: messager.object
      priority: "!!"
      preview:
        title: "Workshop"
        body: "Please return to the workshop."
    - kind: result
      command: move east 1
      status: success
      output: moved east 1

The title and body are bounded notification fields; the complete conversation and
message history remain inside the messager object's public chat functions. A
broadcast notification does not force the receiving agent to open or answer it.

Unresolved concerns:
Normal priority, chat addressing, conversation grouping, unread state, and exact
title/body length limits remain open.

Round 16 — Normal message priority

Question:
Should an ordinary messager message have no priority marker, with `!`, `!!`, and
`!!!` reserved for increasing urgency, or should every message carry at least `!`?

Vision:
An ordinary messenger message has no priority marker. `!`, `!!`, and `!!!` are
optional increasing-urgency labels.

Priority is descriptive only. The receiving agent may ignore any notification,
including `!!!`, and is never forced to read, respond, interrupt its current plan,
or execute an action.

`messager.object` follows familiar chat behavior. An agent can open it, choose a
conversation, and read the latest messages. Reading may change unread or seen state
and may emit a broadcast-capable read-receipt event to another agent or human user,
similar to a normal messenger application's "seen" indicator.

Engineering implications:
Represent priority as an optional value whose permitted non-empty labels are `!`,
`!!`, and `!!!`. Do not convert a label into scheduling authority or mandatory
behavior.

Define `Broadcastable` as a reusable object capability with a listener interface.
The runtime listener converts each bounded emission into an ordered `broadcast`
event for the agent currently carrying the source object in hand or backpack.
Chat-specific state and behavior—including
conversations, unread counts, selecting a chat, reading messages, and read receipts—
remain public functions and private state of `messager.object`, not engine built-ins.

Unresolved concerns:
Whether read receipts are automatic or configurable remains open, as do direct and
group chat addressing details.

BROADCASTABLE CAPABILITY CONCEPT

Conceptual Swift boundary, not final API spelling:

  Object
  └── optional Broadcastable capability
      ├── publishes bounded notification events
      └── delivers to its current holder or backpack carrier

The engine understands only the generic event envelope: source object identity,
optional priority label, title, and body. It does not understand chat rooms, seen
receipts, merchants, alarms, or any other domain meaning. Each conforming object
owns those semantics behind its public interface.

"Send to the agent" means that a carried Broadcastable object causes the runtime to
make a normal model request to the LLM attached to that concrete agent. It does not
mean a global agent inbox, an always-running process, or a special prompt channel.

For `messager.object`, a read flow may be:

1. The agent holds or otherwise validly accesses the messenger object.
2. The agent opens the messenger through its public interface.
3. The agent selects a conversation and requests the latest messages.
4. The messenger updates its own unread/seen state.
5. If read receipts are enabled, the messenger emits a broadcast event representing
   the seen transition to the relevant participant's listener.

Round 17 — Messenger read receipts

Question:
When an agent opens a chat and reads its latest messages, should `messager.object`
always emit a seen/read-receipt broadcast, or should read receipts be configurable
per messenger or conversation?

Vision:
Read receipts are always part of messenger behavior and are not configurable.
Reading previously unread chat messages updates their seen state and may emit the
corresponding seen event through the messenger's broadcast capability.

`messager.object` is conceptually a smartphone messaging application. It manages
chat-platform users and connections. For a new connection, it creates the default
thread `#1`. A chat-platform user may create additional thread chats. The temporary
chat mechanism was considered and then removed.

Chats and threads are themselves objects created and owned inside
`messager.object`. They are not placed in a spatial container and do not appear in
world surface details or eye output.

Chat reading follows Python collection conventions:

- Index `-1` reads the latest message.
- Negative indexes count backward from the latest end of the chat.
- Ranged reads are supported using Python-style slice semantics.
- A read may return a string for one message or an array-like result for a range.

Engineering implications:
Add private parent-owned objects to the object model. An owning object may create
internal child objects that have behavior and state but no world-space placement.
They cannot be picked up, dropped, seen by an eye, stood on, or summoned directly.
Access occurs only through handles or functions deliberately exposed by the owning
object.

The messenger owns chat-user, connection, chat, thread, message, unread, and seen
state. The world engine owns none of those domain rules; it provides normal object
lifecycle plus the generic broadcast listener boundary.

Reading by index or range must be deterministic over the chat's ordered message
sequence. A successful read marks the returned unread messages seen and emits the
appropriate receipt event. Re-reading already seen messages does not create a new
seen transition unless the messenger interface explicitly defines another event.

Unresolved concerns:
The exact public function syntax remains open. Whether private child objects use
globally visible object hashes or parent-local handles is also undecided.

MESSAGER INTERNAL OBJECT CONCEPT

  messager.object
  ├── chat-platform user objects
  ├── connection objects
  │   ├── #1 default thread object
  │   └── additional thread objects
  └── message objects

These relationships are private application state, not spatial containment. Looking
at the cell containing `messager.object` reveals only the messenger's surface detail.
Even `inspect` reveals only the public messenger interface and public metadata, not
its private chat-object graph or message contents.

Conceptual read operations, not final shell syntax:

- `read(user: <chat-user>, connection: <connection>, chat: #1, index: -1)` returns
  the latest message visible to that chat-platform user.
- `read(user: <chat-user>, connection: <connection>, chat: #1, slice: -10:)`
  returns up to the latest ten messages.
- `read(user: <chat-user>, connection: <connection>, chat: #1, slice: 0:20)`
  follows Python's start-inclusive, end-exclusive convention.

Conceptual send operation, not final shell syntax:

- `send(user: <chat-user>, connection: <connection>, chat: #1, body: <text>,
  priority: <none|!|!!|!!!>)` sends as the selected chat-platform user into that
  connection's thread.

The acting chat user is required for both read and send. This `user` is an identity
inside a general chat platform. It is not the special human-authority concept
elsewhere called the MikroKhoros user.

Round 18 — Temporary chat lifetime

Question:
What should end and remove a temporary chat: an explicit close by a participant,
the end of its connection or session, or expiration after a configurable lifetime?

Vision:
Remove the temporary chat mechanism. Messenger conversations consist of the default
`#1` thread for a connection plus any additional persistent thread chats.

Engineering implications:
Do not add temporary-chat lifecycle, expiration, session cleanup, or deletion rules.
This keeps the first messenger model focused on chat users, connections, persistent
threads, messages, unread state, seen receipts, and broadcasts.

Unresolved concerns:
Persistent thread creation, naming, addressing, and deletion remain open.

Round 19 — Messenger chat address

Question:
Should every `read` and `send` address a chat using the acting chat-platform user,
the connection, and the thread number—for example `user: alice`, `connection: bob`,
and `chat: #1`—so `#1` is scoped to one connection rather than globally unique?

Status:
Deferred. Messenger is now considered a small architecture example; further chat
product detail is not needed before the general object SDK is defined.

Vision:
Chat read results are YAML records rather than bare strings. They include normal
message data such as sender identity, timestamp, body, optional priority, and other
small delivery or seen fields. Exact messenger schema is intentionally deferred.

Illustrative shape only:

  messages:
    - sender: <chat-platform-user>
      timestamp: <message-time>
      body: "Meet me at the workshop."
      priority: null

Messenger exists here primarily to demonstrate that an object can behave like an
application, create private child objects, expose rich public functions, keep state,
and publish events.

Engineering implications:
Do not spend the current architecture phase on a complete messenger protocol. Its
requirements become SDK use cases and conformance tests for internal objects,
structured function results, persistence, broadcasting, and external identities.

Unresolved concerns:
Detailed connection/thread addressing remains deferred until the object SDK exists.

OBJECT DEVELOPMENT SDK — PRIMARY ARCHITECTURE SLICE

An object is a programmable application inside MikroKhoros, not merely a declarative
record. Developers need an SDK for creating object types and their public behavior.

Required object abilities:

- Define private persistent state and bounded public surface metadata.
- Expose named public functions discoverable through `inspect` and callable through
  the agent's shell.
- Return structured values, including YAML-compatible arrays and records.
- Create and manage private child objects that do not occupy world cells.
- Add capabilities such as Container or Broadcastable and register listeners.
- Read and mutate world state at the authority granted to the object.
- Address exact object instances by canonical id.
- Perform multi-object state changes atomically when a function requires it.
- Call external internet services.
- Connect to approved resources or capabilities on the user's machine.
- Emit asynchronous events and receive supported lifecycle callbacks.

Concrete merchant example:

1. A shop is a container object whose inventory objects have pickup locks.
2. `merchant.object` exposes purchase behavior through its public interface.
3. After validating payment and inventory identity, the merchant addresses the
   purchased object by canonical id.
4. It updates or removes that object's pickup lock at system authority.
5. Payment and unlock complete atomically so the agent cannot pay without receiving
   the unlock or receive the unlock without payment.

Authority direction:

- Object code written with the SDK may be granted system-level world authority when
  the resulting object is authorized by the world runtime.
- System authority is the highest in-world execution level when the external human
  user role is excluded.
- The human user remains the ultimate product authority over what is installed and
  allowed to access their machine.
- An LLM agent does not inherit an object's system authority. It can only invoke the
  public functions the object exposes, with validation performed inside the runtime
  and object boundary.

Language direction:

- The object contract should be language-neutral so additional language runtimes can
  implement the same SDK boundary.
- JavaScript is a strong first portable SDK language for macOS, Linux, and Windows.
- AppleScript may be supported later as a macOS-specific adapter, but cannot be the
  cross-platform object format.
- Trusted native Swift objects remain possible for built-in or genesis behavior.
- The language runtime is an implementation detail; object identity, state,
  functions, capabilities, events, permissions, and world transactions have one
  shared contract.

Provisional bundle shape:

  example.object/
  ├── object.yaml       # identity, metadata, entry point, declared capabilities
  ├── main.js           # object behavior in the first portable runtime
  └── assets/           # optional non-code resources

The earlier declarative-only bundle decision is superseded for the SDK direction.
Declarative objects may remain a simple subset, but the intended object platform
must support executable behavior.

Critical trust boundary:

An executable object with unrestricted network, filesystem, process, credential, or
world authority is equivalent to installing a powerful local application or plugin.
Those capabilities must be represented and enforced by the host runtime rather than
hidden in an LLM prompt. The product still needs to decide which objects receive
that authority and how the human user approves it.

Round 20 — Object-code capability approval

Question:
Should code for every installed object receive system-level world and host-machine
access automatically, or should only genesis and explicitly user-approved objects
receive those powers while ordinary downloaded object definitions begin with
restricted capabilities?

Vision:
Use an explicit installation-and-grant model rather than giving every downloaded
object definition automatic authority. The definition declares the capabilities its
code wants. The human installer approves the grants for the installation context.
Genesis object definitions may be shipped with predefined trusted grants, while
community or downloaded definitions begin with only the capabilities actually
approved.

This records the user's "yes" as agreement with the permissioned option in the
question. Code running for an approved object may still be extremely powerful—
including system-level world mutation, internet access, or a bridge to the user's
machine—but merely possessing or downloading its definition grants none of those
powers.

Engineering implications:

- Keep requested capabilities in the object-definition manifest and effective grants
  in installation state; do not confuse the two.
- The host supplies opaque capability handles to the object runtime. A capability
  that was not granted is absent and cannot be recovered from an LLM prompt.
- Check both the capability grant and the current installation/invocation context at
  every privileged SDK boundary.
- Keep installer/authorizer identity, invoking agent identity, and executing object
  identity separate. Calling an object does not transfer its authority to the agent.
- Allow the human user to inspect and revoke grants. Revocation must take effect at
  the host boundary even if object code is currently uncooperative.
- A genesis origin establishes provenance, not unlimited authority by itself. Its
  trusted grant set remains explicit and inspectable.

Unresolved concerns:
The exact capability vocabulary, approval UX, persistence of grants, and behavior of
an in-flight function after revocation still need design. Those details should follow
the first real object use cases rather than be invented all at once.

DISCORD APPLICATION/BOT REFERENCE

Discord is a useful product analogy because a bot is an application installed into
a shared environment and receives interactions through that environment. MikroKhoros
objects are broader—they may be physical tools, containers, portals, shops, apps, or
bridges—but the following boundaries transfer well:

- Installation has a context. Discord distinguishes server-installed and
  user-installed applications. MikroKhoros can similarly distinguish an object
  installed into one world from an object installed for a user across worlds.
- Requested and granted authority are distinct. Discord installation requests scopes
  and permissions; the installed application operates with the resulting grants.
- Public entry points are typed. Discord interactions carry command/component data
  plus the server, channel, user, installation owner, and effective permissions.
  MikroKhoros object calls should likewise arrive with explicit caller and world
  context, rather than trusting identity claims supplied as ordinary arguments.
- Events are subscriptions, not prompt text. Discord's Gateway delivers typed,
  sequenced events, and intents select event categories. MikroKhoros capabilities
  and listeners should expose bounded typed events that the runtime may then render
  into an agent's YAML event stream.
- Installer, invoker, context, and application are separate identities. This is
  essential when an agent invokes an object that possesses more authority than the
  agent itself.

Discord is only a boundary reference. Its guild/channel/message data model should
not determine MikroKhoros world geometry or object semantics.

Official references consulted:

- https://docs.discord.com/developers/resources/application
- https://docs.discord.com/developers/events/gateway
- https://docs.discord.com/developers/platform/interactions
- https://docs.discord.com/developers/interactions/receiving-and-responding

OBJECT DESIGN PHILOSOPHY — DRAFT 0.1

Core maxim:

  The kernel provides identity, space, ordering, authority, transactions, persistence,
  and events. Product behavior lives in objects.

1. Objects are applications, not data bags.
   An object may have code, private state, public functions, child objects, assets,
   listeners, and lifecycle behavior. A passive rock can use the same model with a
   tiny or empty function surface.

2. The public surface is the contract.
   Surface details are small and safe to observe. `inspect` reveals the callable
   public interface and public metadata. Private state, source code, capability
   handles, child-object graphs, secrets, and internal implementation remain private.

3. Capability composition beats special cases.
   Container, Broadcastable, Lockable, Eye-like sensing, inventory, and host bridges
   are capabilities or object interfaces. The world kernel should not grow a unique
   command or privileged code path for every product idea.

4. Power is explicit, contextual, and revocable.
   Objects declare requested capabilities and receive only approved grants for an
   installation context. Powerful objects are allowed; invisible ambient authority
   is not. A host bridge is a named grant, never an accidental side effect of the
   scripting language.

5. Invocation does not transfer authority.
   An agent can call a public function, but cannot extract the object's capability
   handles or act as that object. The object validates the caller and arguments, and
   the host independently enforces its effective grants.

6. Identity and provenance are stable.
   Every instance has a canonical id. Object type, installed bundle/version, creator
   or genesis origin, installation owner, and current container can be distinguished.
   Display names are helpful labels, never security identities.

7. Spatial objects and private child objects are different relations.
   Spatial containment determines cells, collision, pickup, drop, and eye output.
   Ownership lets an application object manage internal objects that consume no world
   cell and are reachable only through its public interface.

8. World changes are transactional.
   A public function may change several objects, but its committed world mutation is
   atomic. Ordering remains deterministic under the world's first-come-first-served
   queue. Failure must not expose half a purchase, half a transfer, or half an unlock.

9. Asynchrony enters through typed events.
   Objects publish bounded events through declared capabilities. Listeners subscribe
   to event types. The runtime orders and persists the events before rendering them
   as YAML output or broadcasts to an agent. Object code does not splice arbitrary
   text into the system prompt.

10. Portable semantics, replaceable runtimes.
    The SDK contract defines values, calls, events, transactions, errors, identities,
    and capabilities independently of language. JavaScript can be the first portable
    adapter; native Swift and platform-specific adapters obey the same semantics.

11. Genesis is provenance, not a second physics system.
    Developer-created genesis objects use the ordinary object contract wherever
    possible. They can be preinstalled and pregranted trusted capabilities, but their
    behavior remains inspectable and their grants remain explicit. This keeps an eye,
    portal, key, summoner, merchant, and community-built object conceptually coherent.

12. Errors belong to the interface.
    Public functions return stable typed errors and small hard-coded recovery hints.
    Object authors cannot rely on the LLM guessing hidden preconditions, and error
    handling must remain useful for both CLI users and agents.

13. Definition is not instance, and installation is not placement.
    The SDK helps a designer author an object definition. Making that definition
    available to a world, creating a live instance from it, placing that instance in
    a container, giving it to an agent, and invoking one of its functions are
    conceptually separate operations. The exact publishing and creation lifecycle is
    not decided yet.

14. Prefer the smallest complete primitive.
    New kernel behavior is justified only when multiple unrelated objects need the
    same invariant and object code cannot enforce it safely. Messenger, merchant,
    and eye behavior should first prove the SDK rather than each becoming a subsystem
    in the kernel.

TERMINOLOGY CORRECTION

"SDK object" is not a valid product term. It conflates a development tool with the
object produced using that tool.

- Object SDK: the APIs, tools, types, documentation, and runtime contract an object
  designer uses to code behavior for objects in the world.
- Object designer: the human developer who uses the Object SDK.
- Object definition/package: provisional term for the designer's code, manifest, and
  assets before it becomes a live thing in a world. Whether this is reusable is not
  yet decided.
- Object instance: provisional term for an actual object in a world, with its own
  canonical id, state, location or private owner, and granted runtime capabilities.

These terms describe layers, not a final user-facing vocabulary. In ordinary product
language, an agent still encounters and uses an "object."

The earlier Discord comparison applies only to application boundaries such as
authorization, invocation context, and event delivery. It does not establish that
MikroKhoros must copy Discord's installation lifecycle.

Round 21 — Result of object design

Question:
When an object designer finishes coding with the Object SDK, should the result be a
reusable definition from which a world can create multiple object instances, or
should that project produce one specific object directly for one world?

Vision:
The Object SDK lets an object designer code a reusable object design. The shop is
the world-native distribution point for that work: agents encounter merchandise in
the world and obtain their own concrete objects through the shop rather than using
the SDK themselves.

The shop remains an ordinary container object placed in the world. The merchant
remains an object inside it that handles payment and unlocks merchandise. An object
offered by the shop has a concrete instance id, its own state, and its own pickup
lock. Once purchased, that specific object becomes available for the agent to pick
up and use.

The intended relationship is:

  object designer
      └── uses Object SDK to code a reusable object design
              └── object is made available through a shop
                      └── agent purchases a concrete object
                              └── merchant unlocks it for pickup

The SDK is entirely on the designer/development side. It is not an object, command,
or capability exposed to the agent merely because the agent is inside the world.

Engineering implications:

- Preserve a reusable definition-versus-live-instance distinction internally, even
  if the product usually calls both simply an object.
- Every purchasable instance has independent identity, state, durability, ownership
  or placement, and lock status.
- The shop and merchant use the ordinary Object SDK/object interfaces; shopping is
  not a special LLM command or a separate physics system.
- Purchasing must refer to the merchandise instance's canonical id so duplicate
  display names or multiple copies cannot make the transaction ambiguous.
- Payment and unlocking the selected instance remain one atomic transaction.
- How an object design reaches a shop is a designer/user workflow, separate from how
  an agent purchases and uses the resulting object inside the world.

Unresolved concerns:
Resolved in Round 22: the shop holds concrete, positioned object instances. The user
controls restocking; purchase does not create the merchandise.

Round 22 — Shop stock and object creation

Question:
Does a shop sell concrete object instances that the user has already placed in its
inventory, or does it keep an object design and create a fresh instance when an agent
buys one?

Vision:
Correction to the first answer recorded for this round: purchase does not create a
fresh instance. The shop already contains concrete merchandise objects. Each item is
visible in the shop according to normal eye rules, occupies a real coordinate in the
shop's container space, has a canonical instance id, carries its own state and
durability, and has a pickup lock.

The human user configures restocking. Restocking is the separate process that creates
or places replacement merchandise in the shop. This is why tool durability belongs
to concrete instances: one purchased tool may wear down or break, while a restocked
replacement is another concrete object with its own initial durability and identity.

The original shop model is authoritative:

  user-controlled restock
      └── concrete object is placed at a shop coordinate with a pickup lock
              └── agent sees and selects that exact object
                      └── merchant takes payment and changes its pickup lock
                              └── agent picks up the same object instance

Engineering implications:

- Shop inventory is derived from the concrete objects currently positioned inside
  the shop, not from a virtual catalog that mints objects on demand.
- The merchandise's canonical id is the purchase target. Name, object design/type,
  or shop-list position alone is insufficient when several similar tools exist.
- Purchase validates that the targeted instance is still in the shop, still for
  sale, still locked under the expected merchant policy, and not already sold.
- Payment deduction and the selected object's pickup-lock transition are atomic.
- Retrying or replaying a purchase must not charge twice or sell the same instance to
  two agents; purchase requests still need transaction identity or equivalent
  idempotency protection.
- Restocking is user-configured and separate from purchase. The restock mechanism may
  create and place a new instance from an object design, but the merchant does not do
  so as a side effect of a sale.
- Every stocked and purchased instance evolves independently. Remaining durability
  is never shared with other inventory or back into its reusable design.

Unresolved concerns:
The exact user-facing restock controls remain open. The lock extension must ensure
that changing the sold item's lock does not let another agent take it before the
buyer does.

CURRENT PRODUCT PICTURE

MikroKhoros is a persistent, spatial runtime in which one or more agent entities live
and collaborate. An LLM is the cognition attached to an agent; it is not an external
operator choosing a world or being told to run MikroKhoros. The LLM acts only through
the runtime's shell action language and receives ordered YAML results and events.

The world kernel owns the small set of universal invariants: identity, coordinate
spaces and containers, occupancy, holding and storage, deterministic action ordering,
atomic state transitions, permissions, persistence, and typed event delivery. It does
not hard-code every useful behavior as a command.

Objects carry the product's useful powers. An eye provides observation; messager
provides communication; summoners, portals, and keys move or connect agents; shops,
merchants, coin, locks, and durability support acquiring and consuming tools. Objects
may expose functions, maintain private state and children, publish events, call the
internet, or bridge to approved user-machine capabilities.

Human object designers build reusable object designs with the cross-platform Object
SDK. Agents do not use the SDK. User-controlled restocking creates or places concrete
object instances at coordinates inside a shop. Agents see those stocked objects,
purchase exact instances, and pick up the same objects after the merchant changes
their pickup locks. Each instance can then be held, stored, dropped, used, damaged,
exhausted, or passed between agents according to its capabilities and current state.

This also leaves a clean path toward the future multi-agent network or "hall": worlds
can eventually connect agents, identities, object designs, shops, and event-capable
services without redefining the local object and authority model.

Round 23 — Pickup of purchased merchandise

Question:
After purchase, should a new object be delivered at a shop pickup point or directly
into the buyer's storage?

Vision:
Neither delivery model applies. The merchandise is already a concrete object at a
coordinate inside the shop before purchase. A successful purchase changes the
pickup-lock policy on that same instance so the buying agent can pick it up at its
existing position. The object is not moved, recreated, or inserted into the agent's
hand or storage.

The agent remains responsible for moving to the merchandise and making its hand
available—for example by storing or dropping the default eye—before using the normal
pickup action. Because several agents may be in the shop, the extended pickup-lock
policy must authorize the concrete buyer without opening the object to everyone.

Engineering implications:

- Purchase atomically validates payment and the selected stocked instance, deducts
  payment, and changes that instance's pickup-lock policy for the buyer.
- Purchase does not allocate an object id, initialize durability, or choose a cell;
  those already exist from restocking.
- Delivery does not bypass ordinary hand occupancy, storage, movement, or pickup
  rules.
- A trusted caller identity supplied through the Object SDK associates the claim with
  the actual buying agent; the LLM does not pass a buyer id that could be spoofed.
- Other agents may see the merchandise if their eye view and object visibility allow
  it, but pickup validation enforces the claim.

Unresolved concerns:
The buyer-claim lifecycle remains open: it may disappear after the first successful
pickup, or persist as a lasting restriction on later pickup and transfer.

CONCRETE AGENT IDENTITY

An agent is a concrete persistent entity, not merely an LLM session or a prompt. The
human user creates agents. The runtime issues identity for each agent; the human may
be able to request an id/hash rollout or rotation, but cannot directly choose or edit
the hash value. An agent is then added to a world as a separate membership action.

The model layers are therefore:

  human user
      └── creates agent
              ├── runtime issues agent identity/hash
              ├── user configures name and LLM attachment
              └── user adds agent to a world
                      └── agent receives concrete world presence and state

The agent and its attached LLM are not the same identity. Replacing a model, changing
a provider, compacting context, or beginning a new LLM session does not by itself
create a different agent. The agent owns its persistent world relationships and
state; the LLM provides cognition for its current turns.

OBJECT SDK EXECUTION CONTEXT

The Object SDK supplies trusted contextual values to executing object code. This is
similar in spirit to Scratch's `username` reporter in the Sensing category: Scratch
project code can ask the runtime who the current user is instead of asking the caller
to type a username. In Scratch VM, the `sensing_username` primitive delegates to the
runtime `userData` I/O provider.

Official implementation reference:

- https://github.com/scratchfoundation/scratch-vm/blob/develop/src/blocks/scratch3_sensing.js

For MikroKhoros, a public object-function invocation should receive an unforgeable
runtime context with values conceptually like:

  context:
    agent:
      id: <runtime-issued-agent-id>
      name: <display-name-if-visible>
    world:
      id: <current-world-id>
    invocation:
      id: <transaction-or-call-id>

This is an SDK concept for the object designer, not necessarily a shell command or
agent-visible YAML shape. Exact names are not decided.

The initial concrete use case is `messager.object`. The messenger uses the trusted
current-agent context to resolve which private messenger user/account is acting. It
can then authorize chat reads and sends, update that agent's unread and seen state,
and emit read receipts without trusting a caller-provided sender identity. The
messenger's private chat-platform identity may still be a distinct domain object; it
is mapped to the concrete MikroKhoros agent identity by messenger-owned state.

Engineering implications:

- The runtime resolves caller identity from the authenticated agent execution, never
  from an ordinary function argument supplied by the LLM.
- Shop, merchant, messager, portal, permission, and listener code can use the same
  contextual identity API rather than each inventing caller authentication.
- A user-controlled display name is separate from the runtime-controlled identity
  hash. Names are labels and may collide; hashes identify.
- Creating an agent and adding it to a world are separate operations. A world stores
  membership and concrete presence for an existing agent identity.
- Object code receives only the context fields permitted by the SDK and the current
  world's privacy rules. It does not receive LLM credentials, hidden prompts, or
  unrelated human-user data.

Unresolved concerns:
The phrase "rollout id" may mean initial runtime issuance, later hash rotation, or
both. If a hash can change, the system must decide whether durable references follow
the same underlying agent or intentionally stop resolving.

Round 24 — Agent hash rollout

Question:
When an agent's hash is rolled or changed, should worlds, chats, ownership records,
and object references continue to recognize the same underlying agent, or should the
new hash intentionally create a new identity relationship?

Vision:
Deferred. The answer supplied at this point resolved the purchased-object claim in
Round 25 rather than confirming hash-rotation semantics. The implemented v2 runtime
therefore issues one immutable canonical agent ID. A human cannot edit that ID, and
changing an AI profile does not create a new agent.

Engineering implications:

- Do not implement public hash rollout/rotation in the CLI-first slice.
- Durable world membership, message sender IDs, buyer claims, and object references
  use the runtime-issued canonical ID.
- A future rotation design must distinguish a stable internal principal from a
  rotatable public identifier and define migration, audit, and revocation behavior.

Unresolved concerns:
Agent-ID rotation remains a future identity/network concern. It is not implied by AI
profile replacement.

EXTENDED OBJECT PICKUP LOCK — PROVISIONAL DRAFT

The pickup lock remains a property of an object instance and affects only pickup. It
is not a lock on a coordinate, container, entire object function interface, or agent.
The original locked/unlocked state is generalized into a structured pickup policy.

Conceptual internal shape, not final SDK or model-facing syntax:

  pickup_lock:
    mode: allow_only
    subjects:
      - kind: agent
        id: <buying-agent-id>
    issuer:
      kind: object
      id: <merchant-object-id>
    authority: system
    reason: purchased_claim
    lifecycle: <pending>

Provisional field meanings:

- `mode`: the rule, initially `deny_all` or `allow_only`. Absence of a pickup lock
  means ordinary pickup rules apply.
- `subjects`: identities exempted by an `allow_only` rule. The shop use case names the
  concrete buying agent using runtime-authenticated identity.
- `issuer`: the system, user, agent, or object that created the lock. This supports
  authorization and audit, not a merchant-specific error message.
- `authority`: the level required to replace or remove the lock. This preserves the
  earlier user/system/agent tier concept without treating a tier as the subject.
- `reason`: a stable machine-readable reason code such as `purchased_claim`. It is not
  unrestricted text injected into prompts.
- `lifecycle`: the condition under which the lock clears, still undecided.

Pickup evaluates all normal preconditions plus the object's pickup-lock policy. If
the actor is not permitted, it returns the existing typed `pickup.locked` error and a
generic hard-coded recovery hint. The passive surface still does not reveal the lock.
Authorized `inspect` may reveal bounded public lock information without exposing
private policy or unrelated identities.

This lock is not general ownership. Ownership, possession, messenger identity, and
permission to invoke other object functions remain separate concepts.

Round 25 — Purchased-object claim lifecycle

Question:
Should the buyer-specific pickup lock clear automatically when the buyer first picks
up the purchased object, or persist so only that buyer can pick it up even after it
is later dropped or passed around?

Vision:
The buyer-specific claim persists while the purchased item remains in the shop. Only
the buying agent may pick it up. If that agent does not pick it up, the exact item
stays at its existing coordinate and remains reserved there.

On the buyer's first successful pickup, the claim has completed and the pickup lock
clears. The object then follows the ordinary collaboration rules: the buyer can hold,
store, use, drop, or later pass it, and another agent may pick it up after it is
dropped unless a new lock is deliberately applied.

Engineering implications:

- Purchase changes the selected instance from shop inventory lock to an `allow_only`
  claim for the authenticated buying-agent ID.
- The item does not move during purchase. Its coordinate and object ID stay the same.
- A non-buyer receives `pickup.locked`; the buyer still must satisfy normal pickup
  rules such as being at the right cell and having an available hand.
- Successful pickup and automatic removal of the completed buyer claim are one atomic
  action. Failure to pick up leaves the claim unchanged.
- The claim has no automatic time expiration in the current vision. An uncollected
  purchase remains physically present and reserved in the shop.
- Clearing this purchase claim after pickup preserves later collaboration and object
  transfer rather than turning the claim into permanent ownership.

Unresolved concerns:
Administrative recovery for an abandoned purchase is not defined and is not needed
for the first implementation unless the user later requests it.

SHOP RESTOCK AFTER PURCHASE

A successful purchase also triggers restocking for that product according to the
human user's shop settings. Restocking is distinct from the purchase target:

1. The purchased instance remains where it was, reserved for its buyer.
2. The shop creates a new concrete instance from the same object design.
3. The replacement receives a new canonical id and fresh initial state, including
   its configured initial durability.
4. The replacement receives the ordinary shop-inventory pickup lock.
5. The replacement is placed at the closest valid free shop coordinate to the
   merchant that the runtime can find.

Therefore a sale can temporarily leave both objects visible in the shop:

  [purchased instance #old]
    position: original merchandise coordinate
    pickup: buyer only

  [restocked instance #new]
    position: nearest available coordinate to merchant
    pickup: shop locked until another purchase

The restock trigger is the successful purchase, not the buyer's later pickup. If the
buyer walks away without collecting the old item, it remains in the shop and consumes
its cell while replacement merchandise may still appear nearby.

Engineering implications:

- Restock settings belong to the human user's shop configuration. The world engine
  should not invent product quantities, pricing, or replenishment policy.
- Restock creates a separate instance; it never resets, moves, renames, or re-locks
  the sold instance.
- Placement searches outward from the merchant for the nearest valid unoccupied cell
  in the shop's local coordinate space. The merchant is fixed at the shop's local
  `(0,0)`, so restock placement searches outward from that origin. Equal-distance
  ties need a fixed deterministic direction order so replay produces the same result.
- The new instance becomes visible and collidable under normal object rules as soon
  as restock commits.
- Concurrent purchases and restocks use the world's first-come-first-served ordering
  and atomic placement, preventing two replacements from claiming the same cell.

Round 26 — Infinite coordinate correction

Question withdrawn:
The question about a shop having no free coordinate was based on an invalid bounded-
space assumption.

Vision:
Every MikroKhoros coordinate space is infinite and never has a configured spatial
boundary. This applies to the root world and to the local coordinate space inside
every container, including shops, houses, chests, and backpacks when spatial
container semantics apply.

Coordinates extend without a maximum in every direction:

  ... (-2,0), (-1,0), (0,0), (1,0), (2,0) ...

The fixed 5-by-5 value belongs only to the eye object's observation window. It limits
what one eye-function call reports; it does not limit the world, a container, agent
movement, object placement, or restocking.

For restocking, the runtime searches outward from the merchant over the infinite
local coordinate plane. Occupied positions may force the replacement farther away,
but they cannot exhaust the coordinate space. With a finite number of current
entities, an unoccupied coordinate always exists.

Engineering implications:

- Do not store width, height, minimum, maximum, border, or capacity as universal
  properties of a world or container coordinate space.
- Movement cannot fail with an out-of-bounds error. It may still fail because of
  occupancy, a relevant object rule, authorization, or invalid action syntax.
- Placement cannot fail merely because a container is spatially full.
- Use sparse storage keyed by occupied coordinates; never allocate a rectangular
  world grid.
- Observation queries only the requested finite window—in the eye's case, 5 by 5—
  from the sparse infinite plane.
- Nearest-position search expands deterministically by distance from the merchant
  until it finds an unoccupied coordinate. It does not need a pending queue for
  spatial capacity.
- Nested path coordinates remain local to the immediately containing infinite plane.

Correction:
All earlier language suggesting container bounds, a full shop, unavailable restock
space, or purchase failure due to spatial capacity is superseded by this rule.

SHOP ORIGIN AND MERCHANT POSITION

The shop is a container object. The shop object itself occupies one coordinate in its
parent space. Its contents do not share that parent plane; they occupy the shop's own
infinite local coordinate plane.

The merchant occupies `(0,0)` in that internal shop plane. This is the spatial anchor
for the shop:

  <shop-position-in-parent>["Shop"#<shop-id>]/(0,0)[merchant.object]

Merchandise and restocked replacements occupy other shop-local coordinates. "As
close to the merchant as possible" therefore means the nearest unoccupied coordinate
to `(0,0)` under the deterministic outward search. The merchant's occupied origin is
never a candidate merchandise cell.

For example, if the shop container is at `(8,4)` in the root world, the merchant is
at:

  (0,0)@world/(8,4)["Shop"#shop-a]

The merchant is not at `(0,0)@world`; it is at `(0,0)` inside the shop. Restocked
merchandise is also placed inside that shop-local plane, never beside the shop object
in the parent world unless an object's explicit function moves it there.

The merchant's fixed position is shop behavior, not a universal rule that every
container must place a special object at its local origin.

Round 27 — Initial placement when adding an agent

Question:
When the human user adds an existing agent to a world, should the user choose that
agent's initial coordinate, or should the world place it automatically near a
designated genesis or entry object?

Vision:
The human user may choose the agent's initial coordinate when adding the agent to a
world. If the user omits a coordinate, MikroKhoros defaults to the root-world origin:

  (0,0)@world

This is a placement choice made by the human user through the CLI or later UI. The
LLM does not choose which world to enter or its initial coordinate.

Engineering implications:

- Agent creation remains separate from world membership and placement.
- The add-to-world operation accepts an optional coordinate/path argument and uses
  `(0,0)@world` when absent.
- Resolve and validate the chosen coordinate against current authoritative world
  state at commit time.
- Adding the agent creates its concrete world presence at that coordinate and applies
  the normal starting-object rule, including the default held eye.
- Store the full container path when a non-root starting coordinate is eventually
  allowed; the confirmed default is specifically the root world origin.
- The result should report the final canonical agent path so the human can see where
  the agent entered.

Unresolved concerns:
The operation still needs defined behavior when the chosen/default coordinate is
incompatible with the agent's initial loaded state—for example when `(0,0)@world`
already contains a placed object or another agent holding an object.

Round 28 — Blocked initial coordinate

Question:
If the chosen initial coordinate is blocked under the normal occupancy rules, should
adding the agent return an error so the human chooses another coordinate, or should
MikroKhoros automatically use the nearest valid coordinate?

Clarification of "occupancy rules":

This refers only to the previously confirmed material-sharing behavior at one exact
coordinate:

- A placed object occupies its cell.
- An agent holding an object has loaded occupancy because the held object follows the
  agent and takes one cell.
- A loaded agent cannot share its cell with a placed object or another loaded agent.
- An empty-handed agent remains nonblocking and may share or pass through a cell.
- The rule does not impose a world boundary, container capacity, or finite grid.

The concrete world-entry case is:

1. Agent A is already at `(0,0)@world` holding its eye.
2. The human adds Agent B without specifying a coordinate.
3. Agent B therefore requests the default `(0,0)@world` and also begins holding an
   eye.
4. Both agents would have loaded occupancy at the same coordinate, which conflicts
   with the confirmed one-cell material rule.

If Agent A were empty-handed, it would not block Agent B. Likewise, an object or
loaded agent at the merchant's internal `(0,0)` says nothing about root-world
`(0,0)@world`, because those are different coordinate spaces.

Vision:
Exact placement returns an error on conflict. MikroKhoros must not silently move the
agent away from the coordinate chosen by the human or from the documented default.

The human may explicitly enable auto-adapt placement. With auto-adapt, a blocked
requested/default coordinate causes MikroKhoros to choose the nearest coordinate
compatible with the new agent's loaded occupancy. This is opt-in behavior.

Engineering implications:

- Without auto-adapt, resolve the exact requested path and test occupancy atomically
  with membership insertion and initial held-eye placement.
- On conflict, do not add partial membership, place the agent elsewhere, or change any
  existing entity. Return `agent.add.position_occupied` with a hard-coded hint to
  choose another coordinate or enable auto-adapt.
- With auto-adapt, search outward from the requested coordinate over the same infinite
  local plane and select the nearest compatible cell using a deterministic tie-break.
- Report the requested path, actual final path, and whether adaptation occurred.

Unresolved concerns:
Resolved: explicit intent wins; placement conflict is an error.
Amended: the human may explicitly opt into deterministic nearest-cell adaptation.

Round 29 — Request-driven agent execution

Question withdrawn:
The question about "starting" an agent introduced an unnecessary process lifecycle
that is not part of the product vision.

Vision:
An agent does not need to be started. It is a concrete world entity with an attached
LLM configuration. When an eligible source sends the agent a prompt/request, the
runtime makes a normal API request to that configured LLM. Mere world presence does
not create a continuously spinning thinking loop.

The primary current request source is a Broadcastable object carried by the agent.
For `messager.object`, an incoming chat message is stored by the messenger. If that
messenger instance is held by the agent or contained in the agent's backpack, it
broadcasts to that agent and causes a normal model request.

The current concept is request-driven and records the concrete agent, its AI profile,
world membership, and pending carried-object events. Process-lifecycle labels should
be introduced only for a later concrete use case.

Engineering implications:

- Agent creation, AI configuration, and world placement are sufficient to make the
  agent addressable by eligible request sources.
- Do not poll or repeatedly call an LLM merely because its agent exists in a world.
- Each delivered request has an exact triggering object/event and invokes the AI
  adapter attached to the receiving concrete agent.
- Serialize overlapping requests to one agent in first-come-first-served order so two
  model calls cannot concurrently control the same agent state.
- The human CLI manages agents and worlds but does not manufacture a fake activation
  step between placement and receiving a request.

Round 30 — Messenger prompt as a normal unified request

Vision:
`messager.object` is how an agent can receive a prompt from a human or another chat
participant. Delivery through the object makes the same normal LLM request used by
the rest of MikroKhoros; it is not a special wake protocol.

Eligibility is possession-based:

- If the receiving agent holds that `messager.object`, it may broadcast to the agent.
- If that `messager.object` is in the receiving agent's backpack, it may broadcast to
  the agent.
- If it is dropped, standing in the world, inside a shop, or stored in another
  container, it does not broadcast to the agent.

On eligible delivery, the runtime rebuilds the normal system prompt and authoritative
self-state, then supplies the already-unified YAML event input. Conceptually:

  events:
    - kind: broadcast
      source:
        id: <carried-messager-object-id>
        type: messager.object
      priority: null
      preview:
        title: <chat-or-sender-title>
        body: <message-preview-or-body>

This event is the ordinary model input for that request. The attached LLM returns the
same raw shell-action lines already specified. MikroKhoros executes them and returns
the same ordered YAML `events` envelope containing echoed commands, results, errors,
warnings, and any interleaved broadcasts. Messenger uses that ordinary request and
result protocol directly.

The model may use the messenger's public functions to read the latest full message or
a Python-style range, send a reply, or ignore it. Priority remains an optional label
and does not change the request format.

Engineering implications:

- Resolve delivery from the source object's actual containment chain. Do not accept a
  claimed recipient agent id from message text or LLM output.
- The runtime, not object-supplied text, owns the YAML envelope and model-request role
  boundaries. Title and body remain bounded untrusted data fields.
- The messenger keeps its private chat state regardless of broadcast eligibility.
- The receipt of a carried-object broadcast is the API-call trigger. Do not introduce
  a second scheduler concept called wake/start around the same operation.
- Results feed back using the existing unified request/response loop; messenger is
  only the source of the initiating prompt.

Unresolved concerns:
If a messenger receives messages while it is not held or in its agent's backpack,
those messages can remain unread in the object. The behavior when the agent later
reacquires that messenger is not yet decided.

Round 31 — Reacquiring a messenger with unread messages

Question:
When an agent later picks up or backpacks a `messager.object` that accumulated unread
messages while elsewhere, should it immediately broadcast the latest unread preview
and make the normal LLM request, or wait silently until a new message arrives?

Vision:
Putting the messenger back into an agent's hand or anywhere inside that agent's
backpack immediately sends the latest unread notification to that agent. It does not
wait for another message to arrive.

Engineering implications:

- Treat the transition from not carried to carried as a notification-eligibility
  event. Carried means held directly or present anywhere in the backpack containment
  chain.
- If unread messages exist at that transition, select the latest unread message and
  emit one ordinary bounded messenger broadcast through the unified YAML request.
- The broadcast immediately causes the normal model request for the agent; it does
  not introduce a separate start, wake, or resume operation.
- Sending the notification does not mark the message as read. The messenger changes
  read state only when the agent uses its read function.
- If several messages accumulated, only the latest unread notification is emitted on
  reacquisition. The agent may then use Python-style indexed/ranged reads to inspect
  the rest.
- Moving a messenger between the same agent's hand and backpack while it remains
  continuously carried does not repeatedly emit the reacquisition notification.
- If there are no unread messages, reacquisition emits nothing.

Unresolved concerns:
None for the reacquisition trigger. Event ordering with simultaneous placement and
other broadcasts follows the already selected ordered event stream.

SECURITY CHECK — INSTRUCTION LEAKAGE AND PROMPT ECHOING

Request:
Research current guidance, audit the design and Swift implementation, and fix concrete
instruction-leakage and prompt-echo paths without depending on a prompt-only defense.

Research consulted:

- OWASP LLM07:2025 System Prompt Leakage
  https://genai.owasp.org/llmrisk/llm072025-system-prompt-leakage/
- OWASP LLM01:2025 Prompt Injection
  https://genai.owasp.org/llmrisk/llm01-prompt-injection/
- OWASP LLM Prompt Injection Prevention Cheat Sheet
  https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/LLM_Prompt_Injection_Prevention_Cheat_Sheet.html
- OWASP AI Agent Security Cheat Sheet
  https://cheatsheetseries.owasp.org/cheatsheets/AI_Agent_Security_Cheat_Sheet.html
- OpenAI, The Instruction Hierarchy
  https://openai.com/index/the-instruction-hierarchy/
- OpenAI, Improving instruction hierarchy in frontier LLMs
  https://openai.com/index/instruction-hierarchy-challenge/
- OpenAI, Understanding prompt injections
  https://openai.com/safety/prompt-injections/

Conclusions:

1. The exact system-prompt wording cannot be guaranteed secret. It must contain no
   credential, token, capability handle, private object state, sensitive host detail,
   or authorization fact whose disclosure grants power.
2. Instruction hierarchy is useful but not sufficient. Messenger prompts and object
   or internet content are lower-trust inputs; deterministic runtime code remains the
   authority for identity, possession, locks, payment, capabilities, and side effects.
3. A messenger message is intentionally a request to the agent, not inert text. It
   may direct the agent within the ordinary product contract, but it cannot replace
   the runtime contract, invent commands, grant itself permission, or demand private
   instructions and credentials.
4. Object names, summaries, public data, function results, broadcasts, and message
   bodies must never be interpolated as model-message roles or YAML structure.
5. Model output is untrusted input to the runtime. It is never an operating-system
   shell command and never gains authority merely because the model produced it.
6. Regex or model-based injection detection may support monitoring, but neither is a
   proof of safety. Complete mediation, least privilege, output validation, bounded
   requests, and approval for future consequential sinks remain required.

Swift audit findings and fixes:

- Previous risk: `initialContext()` could concatenate privileged runtime instructions
  with mutable observation text.
  Fix: `AgentSession.initialRequest()` returns separate `system` and `input` values in
  `AgentModelRequest`. `initialContext(includeProtocol: true)` now rejects the unsafe
  combination instead of constructing it.
- Previous risk: `AgentTurn.text` inserted result and world text as raw multiline
  fields, allowing an object/message string to forge fields such as `system:`.
  Fix: every mutable field is a bounded JSON-quoted string, which is a valid YAML 1.2
  scalar. Newlines, quotes, colons, and document markers stay inside the value.
- Previous risk: multiline or oversized model output reached the action interpreter.
  Fix: the current protocol accepts one nonempty action line, at most 4,096
  characters, with no control characters. Multi-action support will validate each
  bounded line separately under the already confirmed batch limits.
- Previous risk: rejected raw model output could be reflected indirectly through
  diagnostics.
  Fix: pre-parser rejection returns a stable error without including the rejected
  source. A command is included in the YAML `command` field only after this boundary
  accepts it; failed/interpreter-rejected turns omit the command.
- Previous risk: several parser/function errors repeated attacker-controlled
  direction, calculator, message-hash, object-hash, or catalog-hash text.
  Fix: those errors now report stable expected grammar or stable failure categories
  without repeating the supplied token or argument.
- Previous risk: model-visible object and function metadata had no small per-field
  limits.
  Fix: type names, object names, summaries, function names, parameters, lock metadata,
  messenger senders, messages, previews, actions, and model fields have explicit
  limits appropriate to their boundary.
- Previous risk: the model-request builder had no structured carried-object broadcast
  input.
  Fix: `AgentBroadcastEvent` and `AgentSession.request(broadcasts:)` build the unified
  YAML event input with every field quoted and bounded.
- Previous risk: broadcast request construction could rely on the caller to assert a
  recipient.
  Fix: the session resolves the source object by exact id/type and verifies that it is
  held by the receiving agent or inside that agent's backpack. A dropped object is
  rejected as a prompt source.
- Previous gap: `Harness.broadcast` found backpack messengers but not a messenger held
  directly in the hand.
  Fix: both confirmed possession paths are supported.

Prompt-echo policy:

- Never automatically forward a raw model response to a messenger, user, another
  agent, log, object, or external service.
- Never feed rejected raw model text back to the same or another model.
- Echo only a bounded action that passed the current action-line boundary, encoded as
  a quoted `command` scalar. This is the previously requested terminal-result echo,
  not a general echo of model prose.
- A future messenger `send`, internet call, host bridge, or cross-agent action is an
  explicit output sink. It must validate its arguments and effective capability before
  transmitting anything. High-impact sinks may require human approval.
- Logs should store structured codes, source ids, lengths, and hashes where possible;
  raw prompts, credentials, hidden context, and rejected model output are not normal
  log fields.

Compaction and persistence:

- Rebuild the stable system prompt in its privileged role after every compaction.
- Compact only model-visible history and durable task facts; do not summarize hidden
  prompt text, provider credentials, capability handles, or private object state.
- Treat a compacted summary as mutable context, not as a new system instruction.
- Preserve source identity and trust classification for messenger/object events after
  compaction.

Verification added:

- Role-separated initial model request.
- Multiline prompt-echo rejection with no reflection into the next request.
- A syntactically valid action that fails inside an object function does not reflect
  its model-supplied argument through the error result.
- Fake YAML/system fields embedded in mutable world metadata remain inside quoted
  scalars.
- Fake YAML/system fields embedded in a messenger body remain inside quoted scalars.
- Carried messenger broadcasts are accepted; the same messenger is rejected as a
  prompt source after being dropped.
- Full Swift test suite passes after the changes.

Remaining security work for the future executable Object SDK:

- Sandboxed language runtime and capability handles unavailable to object code unless
  granted.
- Per-installation network and host-resource allowlists, SSRF defenses, quotas, and
  revocation.
- Explicit sink policy for messenger sends, internet calls, file writes, purchases,
  portals, and cross-world/hall communication.
- Adversarial regression corpus covering direct, indirect, encoded, multi-turn,
  cross-agent, compaction, broadcast, and object-metadata injection attempts.

Round 32 — Creating an agent before attaching an LLM

Question:
In the CLI, may `agent create` produce a concrete agent with no LLM attached yet, so
the user can configure or replace its AI profile later, or must creating an agent
always select an AI provider/model profile immediately so it can handle messenger
requests as soon as it is placed in a world?

Vision:
`agent create` may create a concrete persistent agent without attaching an LLM. The
user can configure, attach, replace, or remove that agent's AI profile later.

Engineering implications:

- Agent identity, rollout/runtime id, world membership, coordinates, containment
  path, inventory, known object identities, balances, and other durable state belong
  to the agent entity rather than to an LLM provider session.
- An AI profile is a replaceable attachment that identifies the selected provider,
  model, model parameters, and a reference to credentials managed outside the agent's
  model-visible state.
- Creating or placing an agent does not require network access, provider credentials,
  or a successful model call.
- Replacing the AI profile preserves the same agent and all of its world state. It
  must not generate a new agent id or silently reset model-independent memory.
- An agent without an attached profile cannot make an LLM request, but it continues
  to exist in the world and its objects continue to retain their own state.
- CLI status and inspection must distinguish `no AI profile attached` from provider
  authentication, rate-limit, network, and model-response errors.

Unresolved concerns:
The behavior of messenger prompts received while no profile is attached still needs
to be decided.

Round 33 — Messages received while an agent has no AI profile

Question:
If a carried `messager.object` receives messages while its agent has no AI profile,
should those messages remain unread and then immediately deliver the latest unread
notification as soon as a profile is attached, or should attaching a profile handle
only notifications that arrive afterward?

Vision:
Messages received while no AI profile is attached remain unread. Attaching an AI
profile immediately delivers the latest unread notification through each eligible
carried messenger and makes the normal model request. It does not wait for another
message.

Engineering implications:

- Attaching or replacing a profile is another eligibility transition for pending
  unread delivery, alongside reacquiring a messenger.
- After the profile attachment commits, inspect the agent's held object and backpack
  containment tree for Broadcastable sources. Each messenger with unread messages
  may emit its latest unread bounded preview.
- Do not mark the message read merely because its notification was delivered.
- If provider invocation fails, retain the unread message and report the provider
  error separately; attaching a profile must not destroy or rewrite messenger state.
- Serialize these triggered requests with any already queued request for the same
  agent using first-come-first-served order.

Unresolved concerns:
None. Stored unread prompts survive the period without an attached LLM.

Round 34 — Autonomous completion and implemented v2 scope

Request:
Stop the question-by-question interview. Infer the remaining product decisions from
the established vision and complete the product, then recreate the repository's
single local initial commit.

Vision applied:

- The product should prefer concrete, usable agent UX over speculative edge-case
  questioning.
- The current deliverable is the CLI-first runtime. The localhost browser UI is a
  later presentation layer because its UI was explicitly deferred.
- Agents, objects, worlds, profiles, messenger events, and shops must be real
  persistent product entities, not only documentation or mock concepts.
- Do not add a second start/wake/scheduler abstraction. A normal carried-object
  notification creates the normal role-separated model request.
- Preserve the simple shell-action contract and use objects for powers rather than
  adding hidden model tools.
- Prefer a safe, honest extension boundary over pretending downloaded executable
  code is sandboxed.

Autonomous product resolutions:

1. Workspace and CLI
   - The Swift executable is now a persistent human control surface with interactive
     initialization and scriptable commands for status, adapter discovery, agent
     create/list/show/add/remove, profile set/clear, pending-request execution,
     raw-action shell use, messenger delivery, coin grants, and world display.
   - External message delivery and profile attachment immediately perform the normal
     model request when an active profiled agent has a pending notification. `agent
     retry` handles a preserved request after a provider/network failure.
   - `agent create` creates an agent without placing it unless `--add` is supplied.
     Exact blocked placement returns an error and leaves it outside the world; `--auto-adapt`
     uses the deterministic nearest available cell.
   - CLI state uses a bounded event-sourced JSON workspace with atomic writes,
     stable world/agent/genesis-object IDs, persisted messenger IDs/timestamps,
     provider-independent history, and POSIX owner-only permissions when available.
     Only credential environment-variable names are persisted.
   - Per-action generated-ID/time tapes preserve identities created by successful
     object functions during replay; workspace loading fails closed if a previously
     successful canonical command no longer succeeds.
   - The first-party journal stores canonical successful action effects and
     notification consumption, not rejected raw model text. Embedding hosts remain
     responsible for persistence adapters for arbitrary custom native Swift object
     closures/graphs.

2. Agent and action lifecycle
   - An agent is created separately from world membership and profile attachment.
   - First world entry creates one genesis eye in hand. Removal and reentry preserve
     the same agent and do not create another eye.
   - Agent requests are request-driven. One LLM response may contain several action
     lines. The configured prefix runs in global first-come-first-served order, the
     first error stops later accepted commands, and excess trailing commands produce
     a warning.
   - Broadcasts created between actions are inserted at the corresponding position
     in the one ordered YAML event array.

3. Occupancy and paths
   - Every world/container coordinate space is an infinite sparse plane; finite
     bounds are rejected.
   - Empty-handed agents remain non-material and can share/pass through cells. A
     held object makes its agent a loaded material unit that reserves one cell.
   - `held` and `standing_on` are mutually exclusive.
   - World/container paths follow the selected coordinate/name/id syntax. An
     attached backpack uses an explicit `backpack[...]` root rather than producing
     an invalid or fake world coordinate.

4. Perception and objects
   - Automatic state contains identity, structural path, held surface, standing
     surface, and coin only. It contains no nearby view.
   - `eye.object` supplies the fixed 5x5 `look` function and is otherwise a normal
     object.
   - Built-in object slices now include scratchpad, safe calculator, messenger,
     portal/key, summoner, coin, apple, containers, merchant, and shop/restocking.
   - The portal key and summoner store themselves before their movement effect so a
     loaded agent does not illegally overlap the destination/target object.

5. Shops and locks
   - Human/user authority is ultimate; system is the highest in-world authority;
     agent authority is lowest.
   - Locks support deny-all and allow-only modes. A purchase atomically replaces the
     merchant inventory lock with a buyer-only claim that clears after the buyer's
     first successful pickup.
   - Concrete sold inventory stays at its real shop coordinate until pickup.
   - Optional restocking creates a new full-durability instance at the nearest free
     coordinate around the merchant at local `(0,0)`. The infinite shop guarantees
     a free cell for every finite occupancy set.

6. Messenger collaboration
   - Threads are persistent; temporary chat was removed. `#1` is the default.
   - Messages retain sender, optional sender agent ID, timestamp, body, optional
     `!`/`!!`/`!!!` label, and read state. Reads use Python indices/slices and create
     mandatory read receipts.
   - A Broadcastable source is eligible only while held or under the receiving
     agent's backpack. Reacquisition queues one latest unread event without marking
     it read or duplicating continuous hand/backpack transfer.
   - Messages received without a profile stay unread. Attaching/replacing a profile
     immediately queues the latest unread event from each eligible carried source.
     Provider failure restores the pending event.

7. AI profiles and adapters
   - Direct role-separated transports cover OpenAI-compatible APIs, Azure OpenAI,
     Anthropic, and Gemini.
   - A data-driven catalog follows the current OpenDesign registry and detects these
     coding-agent options: amr, claude, codex, devin, opencode, byok-opencode,
     hermes, trae-cli, grok-build, kimi, cursor-agent, qwen, qoder, copilot, amp, pi,
     kiro, kilo, vibe, deepseek, deepseek-harness, aider, antigravity, reasonix,
     codebuddy, mimo, and atomcode.
   - Coding CLIs are not launched with their normal shell/filesystem authority. They
     require a user-configured role-separated HTTP bridge so the MikroKhoros action
     surface remains the only agent interface.

8. Object SDK boundary
   - The shipped portable format is the closed declarative JSON object bundle.
   - Trusted hosts can implement native Swift object subclasses.
   - Object package manifests request explicit world-scoped capabilities:
     private children, broadcast, world read/write/system, network, and user-machine.
     Grants are subsets of requests and are revocable.
   - Invocation identity is created by the runtime and binds invocation, object,
     installation, agent, and world IDs.
   - A future JavaScript entry point may be represented in a manifest but is not
     executed. Executing it requires a real sandbox, quotas, network/SSRF policy,
     user-machine mediation, auditing, and revocation.

9. Instruction leakage, prompt echoing, and compaction
   - The stable contract and mutable YAML data are always distinct provider roles.
   - The contract contains no credential/capability/private-state secret and is
     reconstructed on every request.
   - Mutable fields are bounded JSON-quoted YAML scalars. Model output is bounded,
     control-character checked, and interpreted only as MikroKhoros actions.
   - Failed/rejected model text is neither echoed to the next model request nor
     stored in the CLI workspace. Only successful validated commands are echoed and
     retained.
   - Model-visible compaction keeps a bounded tail plus a mutable checkpoint; it does
     not summarize or promote hidden system text. This follows the structural lesson
     from DeepSeek Harness: system prompt assembly is per request, while compaction is
     a user-message/surface replacement.
   - GPT-5.6 Sol guidance is applied through a lean single-source contract, relevant
     tools only, explicit authority boundaries, a balanced reasoning baseline, and
     representative evaluation rather than unconditional maximum reasoning.

10. Verification and future scope
    - The implemented v2 suite contains 39 passing tests covering world/occupancy,
      eye perception, queue ordering, batches, errors, paths, locks, shops,
      messenger reads/receipts/reacquisition/profile attachment, provider failure,
      prompt quoting/no-echo, compaction reinjection, adapter registry, Object SDK
      grants, and workspace replay.
    - A localhost web UI, the multi-agent Hall/network, blockchain integration, and
      an executable sandboxed portable Object SDK remain future extension layers.
      They must reuse this runtime rather than create a parallel agent model.

Unresolved concerns:
None for the CLI-first v2 implementation. Future-layer product questions should be
raised only when work begins on those explicitly deferred layers.

Round 35 — Open-source project baseline and output hardening

Request:
Review every project document, add the files expected of a modern open-source
project, repeat the instruction-leakage/prompt-echo research, fix concrete gaps, and
recreate the single initial local commit.

Documentation resolutions:

- `README.md` remains the user entry point; `docs/README.md` now defines document
  status and precedence.
- `design.md` remains canonical. This chronological file is marked complete for the
  CLI-first slice, while the original English and Vietnamese files remain historical
  records rather than silently becoming current specifications.
- The mislabeled Round 24/25 answers were corrected: agent-ID rotation is deferred;
  the buyer claim clears on the buyer's first successful pickup. Blocked agent
  placement remains resolved in Round 28.
- Project policy now includes `AGENTS.md`, `CONTRIBUTING.md`, `SECURITY.md`,
  `SUPPORT.md`, `GOVERNANCE.md`, `CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md`, `CHANGELOG.md`, an Apache-2.0
  license, formatting/line-ending configuration, GitHub issue and pull-request
  templates, Dependabot, and a macOS/Linux/Windows Swift CI matrix.
- Repository coding-agent instructions contain only contribution workflow and
  trust-handling guidance. They link to canonical product and security documents
  instead of duplicating those specifications.

Security research update:

- OWASP continues to recommend structured instruction/data separation, input and
  output validation, least privilege, human approval for consequential actions,
  monitoring, and adversarial regression testing.
- OWASP's agent and MCP guidance specifically treats tool results as untrusted,
  requires authorization at the tool/sink boundary, and warns against raw shell,
  arbitrary URL, and ambient host access.
- OpenAI's 2026 instruction-hierarchy work shows that models can become more robust
  at preferring higher-trust policy over injected tool/data instructions, while its
  deployment guidance still recommends layered controls, narrow access, explicit
  tasks, user review, monitoring, and red teaming.
- Conclusion: prompt wording or an injection classifier is not the authorization
  boundary. MikroKhoros continues to rely on deterministic identity, possession,
  capability, lock, payment, grammar, and persistence validation.

Concrete hardening:

- A provider response is now compared against the privileged system contract and
  current request envelope before any action executes.
- If it contains a long exact normalized word window copied from either protected
  source, the runtime returns `model.output_instruction_leakage` or
  `model.output_prompt_echo`, omits the candidate command, and does not execute or
  persist the copied text.
- The comparison is narrow defense in depth. It does not claim to catch paraphrases,
  encodings, fragmented exfiltration, or every semantic echo, and it is not used to
  grant or deny world authority.
- Human-entered shell actions are unaffected because the protected-context check
  belongs specifically to the model-response boundary.
- Four adversarial tests cover direct system-contract replay, current-request
  envelope echo through an otherwise action-shaped response, oversized output before
  overlap scanning, and oversized broadcast input with event restoration, bringing
  the suite to 39 tests.

Future security obligations:

- External Messenger/network/user-machine sinks need capability checks and, where
  consequential, parameter-bound human approval at the sink.
- A web UI needs localhost origin/Host validation, CSRF protection, authentication
  decisions, and safe rendering.
- Executable object languages and the Hall still require the sandboxing, network,
  replay, identity, and cross-agent controls already documented as future work.

Round 36 — Installed CLI name and per-user state

Decision:

- The SwiftPM executable product and terminal command are both `khoros`.
- A source installation copies the release executable into a per-user binary
  directory that the user adds to `PATH`, allowing `khoros ...` from any terminal.
- The default persistent file remains `~/.mikrokhoros/workspace.json`. The directory
  is created on the first saved change, and `--workspace` selects an alternative
  file when isolation is needed.

Round 37 — Complete prompt-echo and adjacent-boundary audit

Request:
Fix prompt echoing and directly related security problems across the runtime and
documentation.

Resolution:

- The system contract was reduced so each output/trust rule appears once.
- Output screening now covers current and earlier provider-visible user context,
  compatibility encodings, invisible formatting controls, and strict
  response/action bounds.
- Model-visible history is structurally validated and bounded before restore and
  provider use. Compaction now inserts a data-only marker while the complete system
  contract remains a separate field on every request.
- Decoded profiles are revalidated; remote plaintext endpoints and credentials over
  HTTP are rejected. Provider responses are bounded, Gemini keys are not placed in
  URLs, and direct OpenAI Responses storage is disabled.
- Non-canonical project guidance now links to canonical design/security owners
  instead of repeating their specifications.
- Negative restatements of removed product commands were replaced with the positive
  object-capability contract, and model-visible failures no longer interpolate
  attacker-controlled object names or private-state keys.
- The resulting suite contains 47 passing tests. Exact-overlap checks remain defense
  in depth rather than an authorization mechanism or a guarantee against paraphrase.

Round 38 — Installed-agent product architecture and complete configuration

Correction:
The requested comparison with Codex, Claude Code, OpenCode, OpenClaw, and Hermes is
about how those applications design the complete installed product: onboarding,
state ownership, configuration scopes, profiles, sessions, permissions, diagnostics,
and reusable runtime boundaries. It is not a request to copy one project's command
spelling or expose an undifferentiated bag of implementation constants.

Product research:

- Codex uses a shared core/app-server architecture, durable thread/turn/item state,
  typed configuration, layered overrides, resumable sessions, and explicit
  sandbox/approval policy. References:
  https://github.com/openai/codex/blob/main/docs/config.md and
  https://github.com/openai/codex/blob/main/codex-rs/app-server/README.md
- Claude Code separates settings scopes from instructions, skills, agents, plugins,
  and MCP connections. It exposes interactive configuration plus status/doctor
  diagnostics, and models permission decisions as allow/ask/deny policy rather than
  ordinary preference values. References:
  https://code.claude.com/docs/en/settings and
  https://code.claude.com/docs/en/features-overview
- OpenCode makes its terminal UI a client of a local server, supports headless and
  resumable use over the same session core, layers global/project configuration, and
  keeps credentials separate from ordinary settings. References:
  https://dev.opencode.ai/docs/cli/ and https://dev.opencode.ai/docs/server/
- OpenClaw treats onboarding, a persistent gateway, grouped schema-validated
  configuration, atomic activation, last-known-good diagnostics, and per-agent
  inheritance as one product. Its schema can drive both CLI and web surfaces.
  References:
  https://github.com/openclaw/openclaw/blob/main/docs/gateway/configuration.md and
  https://github.com/openclaw/openclaw/blob/main/docs/reference/wizard.md
- Hermes combines a setup wizard, profiles, session browsing/resume, a background
  gateway, named toolsets, memory, and user-visible context/compression settings.
  References:
  https://github.com/NousResearch/hermes-agent/blob/main/website/docs/user-guide/configuration.md
  and
  https://github.com/NousResearch/hermes-agent/blob/main/website/docs/developer-guide/architecture.md

MikroKhoros product decisions:

1. The human administration CLI and the agent's in-world action language are two
   separate interfaces. `khoros` manages the runtime; the attached LLM receives
   structured carried-object events and returns world actions.
2. `~/.mikrokhoros/config.json` owns human defaults and advanced runtime policy.
   `~/.mikrokhoros/workspace.json` owns the concrete world, agents, AI profiles,
   histories, and journal. Provider secrets remain in the process environment.
3. Configuration has two meaningful groups: new-agent defaults and runtime-wide
   request/execution policy. The CLI exposes show, path, keys, get, set, reset, and
   validation; `doctor` validates configuration and workspace together.
4. All eleven previously compiled prompt/request/action limits are user-configurable
   positive integers. Cross-field relationships are validated before atomic save.
   The compaction checkpoint text remains an internal record shape rather than a
   human tuning value.
5. A new agent copies the configured action preference. An existing agent can be
   changed with `agent configure`. The runtime action ceiling remains independently
   configurable, and the smaller value is effective.
6. A missing configuration file selects documented defaults without producing an
   implicit write. A changed configuration applies on the next CLI invocation.
   `--config` and `--workspace` support isolated installations and tests.
7. Current MikroKhoros state is world-based rather than current-directory-based, so
   project/repository configuration layers would add ambiguity without a product use
   case. A future localhost browser UI should reuse the same typed configuration and
   runtime APIs.

Implementation result:

- The ready-to-use CLI now owns configuration loading, validation, atomic
  persistence, diagnostics, and per-agent action-preference updates.
- Runtime limits flow through prompt validation, history/context compaction,
  broadcast request construction, provider response bounds, action parsing, state
  rendering, and result envelopes.
- Existing workspaces remain loadable when the global action ceiling is lowered.
- Eleven configuration tests cover every published key, persistence, missing/default
  behavior, invalid-file failure, runtime enforcement, CLI spelling, and mutable
  per-agent persistence and event ordering. The complete suite now contains 58 tests.

Round 39 — Genesis district and useful first world

Canonical outcome:

1. Four stable, pickup-locked genesis landmarks fit inside the first 5×5 eye view:
   Athena at `(0,-2)`, the Objective Board at `(1,-2)`, the Library at `(-2,2)`, and
   the Warehouse at `(2,2)`.
2. Athena is a deterministic surface-callable genesis steward. Its `brief` function
   explains the nearby facilities. Human-authored world membership, objective, and
   library changes create messages in a persistent `#athena` thread.
3. Athena addresses each agent's stable genesis messenger identity. Carried
   possession and an attached profile make its latest unread notice eligible for the
   ordinary per-agent request gate.
4. The Objective Board contains a locked index at local `(0,0)`. Human-posted
   objectives are concrete locked surface objects at deterministic nearby
   coordinates. Several agents may register the same objective, and a registered
   participant may complete it through the ordered world-action queue.
5. The Library contains a locked catalog at local `(0,0)`. The human CLI fetches
   HTTPS or plaintext-loopback UTF-8 documents under the configured external
   response byte limit. Each document stores its source and exposes bounded
   `read`/`read_range` pages marked `external_untrusted`.
6. The Warehouse is a shared infinite container. A locked directory at local
   `(1,0)` lists direct concrete inventory; agents share exact instances through
   container, backpack, pickup, and drop mechanics.
7. `khoros message orient` sends a standard Messenger request. `khoros objective
   post/list` and `khoros library fetch/list` are human administration controls.
8. Workspace schema 2 stores stable world-genesis identities, objective/document
   placement, and exact Athena notice message IDs/timestamps. Workspace migration
   derives stable facility IDs from the world identity.
9. Goal, planning, writing, pen, and editing capabilities are inspectable object
   families in the planned product surface.

Implementation result:

- The genesis district, object/container behavior, human CLI controls, notices,
  migration, and deterministic replay are implemented in the Swift package.
- Nine focused tests cover the visible locked district, collaborative objectives,
  Athena replay and possession-gated delivery, untrusted document paging, warehouse
  inventory, schema migration, identity validation, and plaintext remote-fetch
  rejection. The suite contains 67 passing tests.

Round 40 — Agent and thread message address

Canonical outcome:

1. An in-world send addresses `<recipient-agent-id>`, `<thread>`, `<body>`, and an
   optional `!`/`!!`/`!!!` priority label.
2. The recipient agent ID resolves to its stable genesis Messenger object. Physical
   movement of that Messenger preserves its address.
3. Cross-agent delivery records the same message ID and timestamp in both Messenger
   objects. The sender copy is read and the recipient copy is unread.
4. A named thread materializes persistently in both Messenger objects on first use.
   `#1` remains the default connection thread.
5. Routing and model notification are independent. The message reaches the stable
   Messenger object, while its exact current hand/backpack carrier determines
   notification eligibility.
6. The human CLI uses the same recipient and thread address through `khoros message
   send <agent-id> --thread <thread> --body <text>`.

Implementation result:

- Agent-to-agent routing, stable Messenger lookup, sender/recipient copies, thread
  creation, persistence replay, and dropped-device delivery are implemented.
- Two focused routing tests bring the suite to 69 passing tests.

Round 41 — Human world visibility and live Luna trial

Canonical outcome:

1. The human administration surface can read the complete world without adopting an
   agent's local perception boundary.
2. `khoros world inspect` returns a JSON snapshot of every registered agent and
   object, including recursive location, ownership, locks, durability, functions,
   private built-in/declarative state, Messenger contents and receipts, pending
   notifications, and non-secret AI profile metadata.
3. `khoros world inspect <agent-or-object-id>` selects one exact or unambiguous
   identity. `khoros world export` returns the complete persisted event journal and
   model-visible histories.
4. Administrative reads are delivered only to the human CLI. They do not expand an
   agent's world view, enter model history, or become a broadcast. Credential values
   remain outside the workspace and both views.
5. A real `gpt-5.6-luna` cognition running through the Codex CLI completed the
   Genesis evidence expedition in an isolated workspace. It registered the concrete
   objective, obtained evidence from Athena, the Objective Index, Library Catalog,
   and Warehouse Directory, wrote a 552-character report into its Scratchpad, stored
   the Scratchpad, and completed the objective.
6. The run executed 42 successful world actions and recovered from material
   occupancy and empty-cell discovery errors through later Messenger turns. The
   complete objective ended with the trial agent as both participant and completer.
7. The trial exposed a planning cost with the one-hand rule: leaving the Eye on the
   world made internal container discovery expensive. The world remained coherent;
   retaining the Eye in the backpack would preserve portable perception for later
   facilities.

Implementation result:

- The administrative snapshot API, CLI inspection/export commands, structured
  private-state renderers, documentation, and focused regression coverage are
  implemented.
- The real Codex CLI/Luna trajectory produced persistent evidence inside the tested
  agent's Scratchpad and an independently inspectable completed objective.
- Quoted object arguments preserve newline, carriage-return, and tab escapes, so
  structured Scratchpad evidence retains its intended layout during execution and
  replay.
- The complete Swift test suite contains 71 passing tests.
